Dear Readers:

It's here! It's FINALLY HERE!  ALEJANDRO’S SORCERESS, the long-awaited e-novella that’s (loosely) part of the Atlantis series, by me as Alyssa Day, is out today, April 14th, for only 99 cents!! AND with 7 other books FREE!

Buy links:
NOOK! 

KINDLE! 
  Kindle UK!

 iTunes!

 Kobo!

Have a peek:

She murmured or moaned, a tiny sound, and tightened her hold on him, and he was lost.
 
"I need you," he said roughly, his voice like sandpaper.  “I don’t know why or how, but I do.  Please.  Please.”

She put her hands on his face and pulled back a little to study his face, and the wildness and desire he saw in her unbelievably blue eyes drove him over the brink of the abyss. 

"Yes," she said.  One tiny word that changed his entire world.

Reader reviews are already coming in and readers are telling me they're laughing out loud and loving this story!!  That funny little novella written around Alejandro, a supporting character from Atlantis Unleashed, will be in e-bookstores today, April 14th! After a life lived in the darkness, Alejandro deserved some sunshine.  So I gave him a funny witch with a crazy family to fall in love with.  I hope you are as happy for Alejandro as I am! And since I took soooo long to get this one to you, I’m not only giving it to you for only 99 cents, but I’m giving you 7 other authors’ stories for FREE!!  Yes, ALEJANDRO’S SORCERESS is part of the DARK AND DEADLY: 8 BAD BOYS OF PARANORMAL ROMANCE boxed set, with Jennifer Ashley, Caris Roane, Bonnie Vanak, Erin Quinn, Erin Kellison, Felicity Heaton and Laurie London! 
All the news, in quick bites:

THE LONESOME YOUNG, a hot, crazy-suspenseful, contemporary young adult novel by me as Lucy Connors came out last week!  It will be in an ad in PEOPLE MAGAZINE the 25th!! *thud* *faints in excitement*

I’ll be at the RT Convention in New Orleans from May 13-18 – please come see me!  THE CURSED was an RT Book Club Reviewer’s Choice Award Nominee for Best Paranormal Novel of 2013, but I'm thrilled for my friend Nalini Singh, who won thhe category this year! (Last year, I took the grand prize for paranormal romance with Heart of Atlantis).   If you haven’t checked out Luke and Rio’s adventures, be sure to do so before THE UNFORGIVEN, book 2, comes out sometime this fall/winter! 

Two more books in the League of the Black Swan trilogy will be coming! (And yes, in Atlantis, I still promise to write Denal and Jack!)

 I recently finally came out about my struggles with depression, after far too long spent hiding because I was ashamed. So now I am working to help break the stigma on this horrible illness.  If you or anyone you love suffers from depression, please ask for help. Let’s make depression our bitch, instead of the other way around!

Thank you for reading this far!! I’ll be back next month wth exciting news on future books!! As always, please share this newsletter with anyone you think might be interested!If you’re like to get news of what I’m up to, check out my website, and/or my Lucy Connors website, and please like my page on Facebook or chat with me on Twitter. I love, love, love to hear from readers and you can email me here.  


Hugs,
Alyssa