HAPPY THANKSGIVING! And happy week of November 28, for my non-U.S. readers! <g>  I have a special surprise for you today - a sneak peek at Ryan Stone from the new book by one of my favorite authors!!

 Katie McGarry writes steamy young adult/new adult fiction, and she's not only amazingly talented, she's one of the sweetest and most gracious people I've ever met.  She was kind enough to say wonderful things about my upcoming YA/NA novel that I'm writing as Lucy Connors, THE LONESOME YOUNG, and I SO appreciate it!

I'm so pleased to be part of her release day excitement--because I can't WAIT to read this book!! So, without further ado, meet Ryan Stone from CRASH INTO YOU!!

Meet Ryan Stone from Crash Into You by Katie McGarry (releases November 26th)

Description: Eighteen and the pitcher for my high school team. Sandy-blond hair, light brown eyes, Red’s shirt, and a baseball cap.

Loves: Beth Risk, baseball, and writing.

Favorite Movie: Field of Dreams

Favorite Music Video: “How Country Feels” by Randy Houser. Everyone says the video reminds them of me and Beth.

Favorite Memory: Waking up next to Beth on those nights she sneaks out to visit me. She always looks so beautiful and peaceful in her sleep.


To find out more about Ryan, Crash Into You, and to win prizes visit her HERE!!

And here's the scoop about CRASH INTO YOU:  

From acclaimed author Katie McGarry comes an explosive new tale of a good girl with a reckless streak, a street-smart guy with nothing to lose, and a romance forged in the fast lane

The girl with straight As, designer clothes and the perfect life—that's who people expect Rachel Young to be. So the private-school junior keeps secrets from her wealthy parents and overbearing brothers…and she's just added two more to the list. One involves racing strangers down dark country roads in her Mustang GT. The other? Seventeen-year-old Isaiah Walker—a guy she has no business even talking to. But when the foster kid with the tattoos and intense gray eyes comes to her rescue, she can't get him out of her mind.
Isaiah has secrets, too. About where he lives, and how he really feels about Rachel. The last thing he needs is to get tangled up with a rich girl who wants to slum it on the south side for kicks—no matter how angelic she might look.

But when their shared love of street racing puts both their lives in jeopardy, they have six weeks to come up with a way out. Six weeks to discover just how far they'll go to save each other.