I don't usually do this, but today's post has absolutely nothing to do with anxiety whatsoever. It does however, have to do with keeping New Year's Resolutions, and one that I kept for 2009. I mentioned earlier how I wanted to display more of my photography in my home and so I created a photo wall. Some of you asked to see pictures. So here you go:

The wall vinyl says "We do not remember days, we remember moments."





Being the perfectionist I am, I can't just show this to you without all of the buts and disclaimers. It's not entirely finished. As I mentioned I still need to fill up the last canvas of a close up of my husband. Also, I need to get better hook ups for the back so they will stay level. Currently they move a lot and look crooked. The family pic in the middle isn't my favorite, but its the only recent one that we have. Since there are only 3 of us it is a little redundant, so as we have more children I will swap some out for pictures of them, and I would like to get some nice pictures of our pets for one of them as well. I couldn't stick to a theme of all black and white, or all color, or all sepia because each picture looks best in a certain way and so I decided to just mix it up so that I could showcase my favorite pictures how they look best.



Just so you can see how it relates to the room.


If you want to know how I did it- instead of paying $150 for each print to be turned into canvas prints, I had shutterfly send me the 16 X 20 prints. I used craft paint to paint the sides of the canvases (black, brown, or cream to match the picture) and then I modge- podged the prints onto the canvases. I didn't modge-podge the tops of the prints, only to glue the print to the canvas. Then I sanded the sides of the prints to make it look a little more worn and to make them fit better. This process cost only about $30 for each which is much better for my budget. (I got the canvases all at half prince at my local Hobby Lobby).



I edited all of the pictures myself, but only took the ones without me in them of my daughter and hubby. My coworker and friend and my hubby took the others.

If you have done anything similar to this or have a way to show us your finished resolutions from last year, leave a link in your comments so we can check it out!

Thanks for looking!



If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email