photo by illustriousbean
Lately I have been feeling a little bummed out for really no apparent reason at all. I had a rough work day with excruciatingly long meetings and I know that the rest of the work week will require some extensive overtime. So I guess thats a reason. I got home and started cleaning my house but lost interest and energy after a little while. Now I feel really grumpy and can't really explain it.

Maybe its the last days of summer flying past me with the heat thats causing me to feel so lazy and sad. Maybe its just a bad rut. But I can't really focus enough to write a really decent post so I just decided to write how I feel.

I am starting to not like going to my church for the simple fact that everyone has children except me. So I sit there and all I can think about is how many people have babies and little children and why can't it be so easy for me? It makes me feel defected in a way. But I know I just need to put my trust in God and he will support me in my trials. He knows better than I do when I should go that route. Plus the other benefits I get by going to church always outweigh the comparing thoughts. I can never escape comparing myself. Thats not to say I only want kids cause everyone else does- because I have already gone a lot longer than most couples that live near me without kids and for a long time I was proud of that fact. But now I see a baby and its more of how I want one.

Also I acted like a huge know it all and started a little family drama that is too draining to even get into. So I have a sister that won't return my calls and she is getting married in a month and I don't know if she even wants me to come.

So life isn't super fun right now so maybe the grumpiness isn't without reason.. And thats ok. It can't always be great. If the clouds never came than I would never appreciate the sun.


In other news, I've been asked to be a guest blogger on another anxiety blog. If there is any suggestions on what you want to read about, let me know. Its not as comfortable trying to post on someone else's blog as opposed to my own. Maybe there is such a thing as social anxiety via blogging?

P.S. I added a song "Speeding Cars" by Imogen Heap to the playlist, its one of my all time favorites that I was finally able to find.


If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety
You might also like:
My Story
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
They're Here...
Looks like Someone’s Got a Case of the Mondays
Linkwithin