Something you may not know about me is that I save every email I get from readers of the blog. I think its nice to be able to read them every now and then when I am looking for support. My husband has told me over and over again that I should do something with the emails and comments from the blog so that I have a keepsake of them. I have used the company www.blurb.com to make photo books of my family in the past and I have loved them. So I thought I would copy the emails and comments into a book and print it out. As I started researching everything their site can do, I realized I could turn the entire blog into a book. This peaked my interest because I thought I could have a physical journal of my journey with anxiety as well as the blog. Then I thought if I was going to do all of this for myself, maybe their would be people out there who would be interested in a book as well.

So I am currently in the process of creating a book about The Reality of Anxiety. I started out with over 400 pages of information. I want to get it down to about 80, therefore it will consist of only the best of the blog- the hottest topics and most helpful for managing anxiety. This book will not contain the emails I get sent for privacy reasons. Due to copyright issues, I cannot copy everything I found from other places word for word, so it will be quite the project to go through and make everything ready for publishing. But I thought I would mention it now just to get a feel for the level of interest, plus any suggestions you may have of what you would like to see in it.

Its been really fun going back to the beginning to see how far I have come and all the information I have learned about anxiety. I feel that condensing the most useful information into a book will also be helpful for easy future reference since I know I will need it.

The funny thing is when I first started the blog my good friend Ben told me I should write a book and I laughed at him thinking he was crazy.

I don't know when it will be done, but I am working on it a little bit every day. Being the perfectionist that I am it could be awhile :) Perhaps I can try to get it done by this year's World Mental Health Day in October.

What do you think?
 

If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email
You might also like:
White and Nerdy- Exciting Blog Updates
Positive Affirmation Flip Book
My Story
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
Linkwithin