This has been such an inspiring month for me. Not only did I launch the blog's first giveaway and started our group forum, but I came up with another idea that I am so excited about and I can't wait to start. 
I was talking with a reader who mentioned that she couldn't find the motivation to work on her anxiety on her good days, but then on her bad days she couldn't focus enough to go through a workbook and hammer out the details. 
I can totally relate with this because on the good days, you just want to enjoy them and not think about the anxiety. However, just because I am having a good day, week, month, or even year, that doesn't mean that you are too. And I want to be helping even if I don't have a personal experience from the day to share. I want the blog to be more interactive, more than just a place to come and read about me. I want to work together to help each other grow stronger. I figure its like exercising- you are always more motivated to do it when you have someone to do it with!
So I came up with a plan of doing a monthly challenge. This would be a topic, learning concept, or exercise that we could all focus on for the month to become better educated and prepared for when those bad days come. We can start with the basics and work our way up from there. I know that everyone is in a different place on their road to recovery, but it doesn't hurt to start over and re-evaluate ourselves and really spend time on the process of healing.

I plan to have down-loadable worksheets and other help aids that I find.

We can talk about our experiences from the monthly challenge on the group forum, sharing what we did that worked, or what didn't work, what "ah hah!" moments we have about ourselves and what we are struggling to understand.
Each month I will feature readers on the blog who are participating in the challenge. The list goes on. Who knows, maybe there will even be some giveaways based on participation.
Remember, if you don't have your health, you don't have anything! So even if you are super busy, I think it'll be a really great investment of your time.

Stay tuned because the first month's challenge will begin on October 1st, a week from today. I would love to hear your thoughts on this. Is this something you would be interested in doing?

Don't forget to enter the giveaway- it ends tomorrow!

If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email
You might also like:
Monthly Challenge: October 2009- Let's Get Educated!
Monthly Challenge: November 2009- Relax!
Monthly Challenge: December 2009- The Helper's High
Monthly Challenge: February 2010- Let's Get Healthy!
Linkwithin