There is a poll on the sidebar right now about how often people exercise. I am surprised to see that it varies all over from NEVER exercising (that's the one I chose) to everyday!

Mr. T and I decided to get gym memberships to follow through with our goal of being more healthy and exercising. And more specifically, I am expecting it to help me reduce my anxiety. This is the best option for us because the gym has a child center where Lil' P can play while we work out. It also has a rock climbing area which we love. A little while back I had my first day at the gym.

I got to start out with a personal trainer who assessed my fitness levels. Overall, it appeared on paper as though I was in pretty good shape. However, when I started an actual workout I ran into a problem. After any exercise set my heart rate would skyrocket into the 170's. I had to wait for a few minutes everytime for my heart rate to go back down before I could continue. The trainer explained that my heart is really out of shape and that I need to do more cardio to get it used to working out. He suggested 20-30 minutes 2-3 times a week.

I am so out of shape that I couldn't move for the next two days. I was soooo sore! I have a lot of work to do.

Here are a few of my favorite tips (from The Anxiety and Phobia Workbook) for starting a new exercise program in order to reduce anxiety:
Expect some initial discomfort. If you are out of shape, aches and pains are normal. As your strength and endurance grow, the pain will pass.
Ideally exercise should be aerobic.
Optimal frequency is 4-5 times a week with 20-30 minute sessions.
Optimal intensity for aerobic exercise is a heart rate of (220-your age) X .75 for at least 10 minutes.
Avoid exercising only once a week. Infrequent spurts of exercise is stressful to your body and generally does more harm than good. (walking is an exception).
Don't forget to sign up for the free online therapy giveaway! First come first serve, so anyone can still win...


If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email
You might also like:
7 Tips for Reducing Gym Anxiety
Monthly Challenge: February 2010- Let's Get Healthy!
Healthy Swap: Drink More Water, Less Caffeine
New Year's Resolutions: 2013- My Year
Linkwithin