And the winner of the first Reality of Anxiety Giveaway is...







Beth, A.K.A messymama!





Random Entry Selected: 1
Odds of Winning: 3 in 11
Entry Data: 3, messymama


Powered by BuzzMyBlog.com

Congratulations to Beth for winning the giveaway! A free copy of The Anxiety and Phobia Workbook is on its way to her doorstep. I've asked her to answer a few questions so we could get to know her a little better.


How old are you?
 
I'm 29.


How long have you struggled with anxiety?

I have struggled with anxiety for the last seven years, since my daughter was six months old; but even as a child I was really high strung and scared a lot of the time.  I thought it was normal.


What are your triggers?
 
My triggers are varied - anything related to dying or health (the Swine Flu has been a big problem lately); any time I have to be alone for longer than a few minutes; thoughts of taking/needing medicine; having to sit still or be in crowds; heavy storms and lightening.  Those are the main ones.


What is your biggest help in managing your anxiety?

I see a therapist once a week and that has helped tremendously to manage my anxiety.  Also, researching it, finding out I am not alone in some of my more strange fears, and becoming educated on anything to do panic attacks has really helped me.  The things that help me manage it daily are praying, talking things over with my husband, your 10 steps, and pushing myself to do something - exposure therapy of some kind, even sitting in my room - for at least fifteen minutes.  My motto is "I can do ANYTHING for fifteen minutes" and it really works.  Learning to not let the anxiety take me surprise has really helped my life calm down.  I look for it, I even wait for it, so that I can be ready for it.  Oh, and one more - I have a handheld Tetris game that goes wherever I go.  I use it in long lines, before bed, whenever I am needing a mental vacation.  Just knowing it's there has been a tremendous help.


If you could say one encouraging thing to someone who is having a hard time with their anxiety, what would it be?

"You are NOT alone - you're not alone in your symptoms, in your struggles or in your fears. You are not a monster, you are not a freak, you're not someone who deserves to be unhappy.  You are creative, with a powerful imagination, and you are sensitive, which means you are the best friend, the best lover, the best mom or dad, the best daughter, the best wife or husband - you are a powerful person and you can live life to the fullest."  That's the message I think every one who struggles with this needs to hear to be encouraged. 

Thanks to everyone that entered. If you didn't win, don't worry, there will be more giveaways to come. Stay tuned to join the monthly challenge this Thursday!




If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email