I don't have very much time to post today so I decided I would leave this quick thought:

I know that the biggest reason I have social anxiety issues is due to a lack of confidence in myself. I've mentioned this before but since its so constant in my mind I will mention it again. One way I am trying to overcome that is to pick up hobbies that I like that allow me to express myself creatively. This not only allows me to be proud of myself and what I have accomplished- but I feel it also gives me a sense of depth as a person, and it helps to define who I am in small ways. Also, it seems to relieve stress for me. Maybe it can do all of that for you too.

So one of my latest hobbies is photography. I also love to scrapbook, play the piano, blog (yes I consider it a form of creativity and expression) and I am sure I will pick more up along the way. I don't claim to be a professional at any of them but it is very fun. Here are some recent pictures I have taken with my new camera I got for my anniversary:

These above are a couple pics of my newest nephew that I took while babysitting.


Here is a combination of 6 pictures taken at different settings and then meshed using an HDR program. Just playing around to see how it works.


Here is a closeup of a flower using a macro filter


Anyway, if you haven't found anyway to express yourself you should. You don't have to be good at it. I am a beginner at pretty much everything I do, but it still brings me a sense of accomplishment and worth to look back and see my progress. Some ideas for hobbies are:

photography
sports (water sports, team sports, etc)
sewing/knitting
carpentry work (woodwork)
scrapbooking
writing
painting
gardening/ landscaping
videography
skateboarding/ longboarding
training for marathons or races
creating webpages
dancing
RC racing
play a musical instrument
sing
The list could go on and on! Now that I have shared one of my hobbies- what do you guys do to express yourself?


If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety