I've procrastinated this goal for awhile now, mostly because the holidays were not when I wanted to start, but also because I am scared to make this lifestyle change! I don't believe in diets. I think being healthy is an everyday thing, not just every once in awhile. And my general health is in bad shape.

Not sure if you are out of shape? Here are some common symptoms:

Being out of breath or having a long recovery time after walking up a flight of stairs
Feeling exhausted after short periods of exertion
Chronic muscle tension
Poor muscle tone
Obesity
Muscles cramped and aching for days after participating in a sport
General tiredness, lethargy, boredom
This month, I want to challenge all of you to join me in making personal adjustments in your lifestyle to better your health. I plan to focus on exercise ideas as well as diet changes such as drinking more water, healthy food swaps, recipes, and cooking tips, etc.
Edmund J. Bourne says, "One of the most powerful and effective methods for reducing generalized anxiety and overcoming a disposition to panic attacks is a program of regular, vigorous exercise...Exercise is a natural outlet for your body when it is in the fight-or-flight mode of arousal...Regular exercise also diminishes the tendency to experience anticipatory anxiety toward phobic situations, expediting recovery from all kinds of phobias, ranging from fear of public speaking to fear of being alone."
I hope since I gave the challenge away early that you have had enough time to think about what you want to do. An exercise program is a commitment that shouldn't be done by flying by the seat of your pants. It will differ for everyone depending on your health goals. There's running, swimming, cycling, aerobics, walking, strength training, exercising at home, joining a gym, etc. So many options!

As always, I'll share what I am up to and what I find helpful. I'd love to hear from you if you plan to join the challenge, and what you will try to do. You can leave a comment below or I have created a new topic in the Discussion Forum where we can share tips, recipes, fun workout ideas, etc.



If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email

Photo provided by:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/pinksherbet/ / CC BY 2.0
You might also like:
5 Tips for Starting an Anxiety Reducing Exercise Program
Announcing Monthly Challenges
Healthy Swap: Drink More Water, Less Caffeine
A Couple Healthy Breakfast Ideas
Linkwithin