Lately my anxiety has been flaring up. I almost had an attack the other day and in all honesty I think I would have if I didn't escape the situation when I did. I'm not feeling all that great today either as I have two BBQs to go to tonight, one I am hosting. I stayed home from a boating outing I could have gone on simply because I don't feel bathing suit worthy and didn't feel like dealing with the insecurity and constant fidgeting I would undergo. So I am blogging and I plan to do some yoga since it has been way to long since I last did it and I hope it will help me to feel better about tonight. I also plan to reread some of my older posts that I wrote to help me prepare for similar occasions.

The last poll was very interesting. It seems like most of us are either pretty personal about our anxiety, telling only our close relatives and friends, or we are very outgoing about it and willing to tell anyone who wants to know anything. Only a few don't dare to tell anyone. I added a new poll that will simply allow me to know what you are most interested in reading about so I have a better idea of how I can help you.

I often look for interesting videos on YouTube relating to anxiety, and awhile back I came across a long 30 minute video of a man named Charles Linden who is trying to sell his services to "cure" anxiety. At the time I watched it, he said some things that really interested me, but I wasn't interested in posting such a long video that was really just an advertisement for someone. Now I have noticed that he has broken this video up into smaller chunks. I found a small portion of it that discusses the science behind anxiety. This is the part that interests me since I don't really know what goes on up there when an anxiety attack occurs. I am not endorsing his services by any means, but I thought this video portion was very educational for me and helped me to understand a little better what happens to the brain- particularly the amyglada- that causes overwhelming anxiety. Is he right? I don't know. He says that its a fact that scientists have long agreed with so I thought I would do more research and see. Although I didn't find any article from a source that was "credible" everything I did find seemed to agree with what Charles is saying.

So I am interested in your thoughts on it. Is he right? Is the "chemical imbalance" that we all hear about just our amyglada getting stuck on overload?
You might also like:
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
Anticipatory Anxiety
Personal Bill of Rights
My Top 10 Anxiety Tools and Resources
Linkwithin