Yesterday I woke up and was so exhausted I talked myself into working from home. A few hours later I realized that my connection was too slow and I wouldn’t be able to get anything productive done from home. So I started blogging and researching on the internet. Before I knew it, it was 6 pm and Tyler was on his way home. I had successfully done nothing the entire day. No shower, no laundry or dishes, not even yoga, just nothin. So I started feeling guilty that I didn’t go into work when there is so much that I need to get done, that I had this day off and sat in bed all day long watching bad daytime TV and surfin the web.
If you didn’t already know who I am let me introduce myself. I am the Queen of Justification and I can rationalize almost any behavior I do to make myself feel better whether it’s right or wrong. Sometimes it’s a bonus and other times it’s a flaw. I’m not sure where this one should be categorized, but watch me go.
For me, every once in awhile I just need a day where I can just be, just exist. I don’t have to do anything if I don’t want to and if the day is a blur with no accomplishments than that’s ok. No pressures, no appointments, no expectations or things to analyze. It’s a mental holiday. And I think that’s ok. The timing might not have been right with the rest of the world, but I have to allow myself those days and not feel bad about them.
Today I am back at the daily grind and I feel the pressure mounting for the next few work weeks. I love the company that I work at and I love what I do, but I know that I am going to have to put in some overtime and I am not looking forward to it. This will happen once every couple months or so whenever we let out a release. If anyone is curious about where I work they can check out this video that is a short advertisement for the software I help create (test actually).



So I know that for the next month or so I won’t be able to justify any vacation time, so yesterday was my one day off for awhile and I thoroughly enjoyed it.
See? I feel better already.
You might also like:
Relaxation Technique 2: Calming Music
My Top 10 Anxiety Tools and Resources
Relaxation Technique 3: Yoga
Relaxation Technique 4: Envisioning a Peaceful Scene
Linkwithin