New Year, Clean Slate, Fresh Look
Sorry I did not write over break, my computer broke and I had no internet access. It’s nice to get in touch with the world again. Happy New Year! What an amazing feeling to know that you have a whole new year to start over. As Natasha Beddingfield says, “Today is where your book begins, the rest is still unwritten.” I am sure you have all made New Year’s Resolutions by now and I hope you are staying positive and motivated. Just a tip, make realistic goals and not too many of them.
I looked back on my 2007 Resolutions and saw that one was to “get over my stomach anxiety” and to gain weight. This made me reflect on everything I have been through this past year and helped me to realize just how much I have accomplished. I have learned so much about anxiety, phobias, etc. and hopefully my journey has helped others to find hope and motivation as well. I may never “get over” my anxiety, but I have learned tools to help me manage it which has helped me to heal, grow stronger in my self esteem, and have a happier life. Sure there are setbacks and bad days where I am not panic free, but I will take today over last January 2 any day.
The holiday break was extremely helpful for my fried emotions. I did nothing. I sat around all day long in my pjs make-up free and watched TV, sewed, and more TV. Today I may be back at work, but I am more relaxed, more patient, and it feels good. I often need to take a day off from work for this purpose only
What are my 2008 resolutions? Besides the obvious baby/parenting ones, all of my goals revolve around finding and bringing more peace into my life by forming good habits. I want to get back into yoga and keep it up consistently. It helps me to stay relaxed and calm more often when I do it regularly, but it’s hard to make time for it when I get home from work and am tired and just want to sleep. So I want to work on that. I want to find a way to stay at peace at work. Whether it’s just remembering the light at the end of the tunnel, or finding/remembering a mantra (ex: happiness happens inside of you, not to you) something to help me not pull my hair out and cry everyday. I want to add more spirituality to my life. Reading my scriptures, prayer, stuff like that. So it all equals more peace.
What are some of your New Year’s Resolutions?

If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety.
You might also like:
CELEBRATE.
I Can Only Imagine
New Year's Resolutions
New Year's Resolutions: 2013- My Year
Linkwithin