photo by fotologic

I am very proud of myself. Today I had a panic attack, but I rode it out and I overcame it. I haven’t had a panic attack, or anxiety at all for that matter, since Thanksgiving.

I got invited to a luncheon with my new department and the fear took a hold right away. It was that panic that I dread which only makes it worse once you recognize its there. So I pulled up some of my previous blogs posts that I refer to often to help myself and I did my mental exercise to prepare for the lunch. I felt a little bit better before we left. Once there the panic came rushing back again and I could tell I was going to be sick, so I went to the restroom. This nausea was definitely different than pregnancy nausea. My face and neck and were flushed and burning. I sat there ready and waiting to vomit, when I closed my eyes, took some deep breaths, and starting saying my positive affirmations over and over.
"There’s no need to push yourself. You can take as small a step forward as you choose."
"I believe in myself apart from other’s opinions."
"I am learning that I don’t need to eat to please others, I only need to eat to please myself."
I could feel the burning sensation leaving, and my body and mind starting to calm down. When I felt like maybe I wouldn’t throw up after all, I sat down and my legs started shaking like they always do after my panic attacks when the adrenaline is working itself out. I was amazed. Sure I had a panic attack, but I was able to keep myself calm enough to not throw up, and to ride it out for the few minutes it was there. I was able to go back out and eat comfortably after that knowing that the worst was over.
I was just so excited to know that even out of practice, I remembered the skills I need to make it through a panic attack, and to help it not be as severe as it could have been.

For ways to overcome a panic attack, you might enjoy some of my posts on:

10 Step Mental Exercise That Will Reduce Panic
My Top Ten Anxiety Tools and Resources
Master Rather Than Victim of My Mind

If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety.
You might also like:
Level 3 Panic Today
My 2 Least Favorite Words: Just Relax!
You Never Know When Anxiety Will Strike
Theres No Need To Push Myself
Linkwithin