So yesterday my old boss instant messaged me out of the blue. She was always like a mother to me and I really loved working with her. However here is how the conversation started:
MA says:
Hey, send me your blog site again so that I can see your Hawaiian pictures. I didn't get to look at them before.
Aimée says:
http://newsfromthewhitehome.blogspot.com/
Aimée says:
I don't put very much on there unfortunately so it hasn't been updated in awhile
Aimée says:
how are you?
MA says:
I am good. I went to the site and your pictures are great. You look way too thin. Are you losing weight? Your trip looks wonderful.

one of the photos she would have been referring to me looking "way too thin"
Now after I read that last line I felt like she had just punched me in the face. For me that statement would come across EXACTLY the same way as if she had said it the opposite way, “You look way too fat. Are you gaining weight?” Had anyone said that to most people in America you would have been floored and very offended. That’s how I feel. Although I know she didn’t mean it maliciously and she is just generally concerned, it just goes back to the fact that telling some one they are too skinny, too fat, too ugly, too tall, too short, too anything = YOU ARE NOT NORMAL AND THERE IS SOMETHING WRONG WITH YOU. I wish our society understood that more. I am learning not to take offense in their ignorance but I did seriously think about replying with some nasty comments. Instead I decided my weight was none of her business and instead of trying to make excuses for the way I am or try to justify myself to her I would simply say,
“Aimée says: I'm fine thanks. The trip was awesome. Have you ever been?”
I figure that was a nice way of saying “thank you for your concern although it is unwanted and you no longer need to feel the need to ask me such personal questions again.” It reminds me of some older posts Absolutely Unapologetically Thin and Every Journey has a Beginning which both touch on this topic.
Am I the only one that is sensitive to this issue? I feel that I am justified in being sensitive because I hear it ALL the time ALL my life and so I constantly am being told that I am not good enough just the way I am. That’s why this has been such a hard challenge to gain confidence in myself just the way that I am.
If anything I am learning to not let those comments wound me so deeply and to just push it aside. I also didn't try to make excuses for why I am the way I am. At least that’s some improvement, a step toward sticking up for myself as I am.
You might also like:
Absolutely Unapologetically Thin
Confidence wavering
Finding Beauty in the Storm
My Story
Linkwithin