I am a big believer in setting goals. I have always done New Year's Resolutions because even if I don't accomplish them all, I feel it helps me stay focused throughout the year on whats important. The last few of my goals this year deal with my anxiety. I made this scrapbook page and printed it out so I can hang it up in my office and I also made it my computer desktop wallpaper so I will see it everyday as a reminder of what I should be doing and focusing my time on.

#7. Baby #3?!?- Although I am much better anxiety wise while I am pregnant and nursing, both times I have had to deliver a baby my experience has been pretty traumatic for me. I want to have one more child for our family to be complete but I am terrified of going through that again. I don't want the age gap to be too big so if I am going to have another baby, this it the year to do it. This terrifies me. I'm excited for my mental state being better, but not wanting to be pregnant again or dealing with a newborn.

#8. Discipline Yourself to Add More BALANCE to your Daily Routine- I tend to be an all or nothing kinda gal. If I get immersed in a project, I can spend hours on it and neglect other more important tasks. I want to be better disciplined about my time. Allow certain times for projects and fun stuff, and make myself stop to do other non fun but important tasks such as cleaning, oh yeah, getting dressed, and exercise.

#9. Make Health an Important Priority- There are so many things I could do to improve my mental health but I am just too lazy. I need to make it a priority and take my multivitamins, drink my water, do my yoga, adjust my diet. These are no brainers but for some reason I never do it. Again, I need to not be so lazy!!!

#10. Travel Abroad- We have been planning to celebrate our 10 year anniversary as well as my 30th birthday by cashing in some sky miles and taking a trip far away. Like Thailand far away. This is exciting but also very scary for me. I have a lot of anxiety about traveling and have spent many a vacation sick the whole time throwing up on the side of the road. I know its important to face these fears and so even though its scary I plan to follow through and go. 

What are some of your New Year's Resolutions for your anxiety?


If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email


You might also like:
New Year's Resolutions
5 Tips for Starting an Anxiety Reducing Exercise Program
7 Tips for Reducing Gym Anxiety
Oh boy...or girl?!?
Linkwithin