photo found at Citytv
I've said it before and I'll say it again. I LOVE yoga! It always amazes me just how refreshed and rejuvenated I feel after doing it. It always seems hard to find the time, but when I do, even 20-30 minutes of it, I am always glad afterward. It feels like I have washed my slate clean, opened up the windows and let some fresh air in, and I get a burst of energy. Meditation is so important to reduce the stress in our lives.
An article on webmd says "Doing yoga may reduce stress and anxiety. It can also help your body to be more flexible. Several studies have shown that yoga has health benefits such as improving a person's sense of well-being, helping to lower blood pressure, and helping people who have asthma learn to breathe more easily."
Another webmd article lists all the benefits of yoga including flexibility, strength, posture, breathing, less stress- more calm, concentration and mood, heart benefits, and more. You can click on these links to view the articles in full.

Its been one of my new years resolutions to get back into doing yoga and I have been meaning to get started. I can tell that my body and mind has been CRAVING it because I haven't been able to shake the heavy, stressful, sluggish feeling that's been lingering around me the last couple weeks.

It can be difficult to find a good yoga show if TV is the way you want to go. There are a lot of really cheesy ones out there. You'll find the old ladies in the 80's outfits usually in the early hours of the morning, the hippies in Jamaica, the Hawaiians in full Hawaii gear, etc. I started out with the hippies because they were the most tolerable and least annoying.

However I have found a show on FitTV that I really like. Its called Namaste Yoga. I get it now that I switched my satellite service to Direct TV. The show actually has normal people in it! I have a DVR so I record the shows whenever and save a handful of them so that when I want to do the workout its already to go and I don't have to rely on the tv's schedule. I highly recommend this show for anyone that wants to do yoga in the privacy of their home. Here is a sample of what the show is like:




Many gyms also provide yoga classes if you would rather go that route.

Whatever your strategy for meditation, the important thing is to have one and follow through. It could be as simple as doing breathing exercises every once in awhile, or taking time to relax away from all the noise and chaos of our daily lives.

Maybe one day I'll be good enough at the yoga that I won't need the shows and I'll be able to do it all on my own, that would be cool. What kind of meditation techniques do you do?
You might also like:
Another Testimonial of the Awesomeness of Yoga
Yoga for Workaholics
4 Great Reasons to Track Your Meditation Efforts in a Log or Journal
Taking Deep Breaths
Linkwithin