photo by Aussiegall

Oh my dream world, the one I can’t seem to actually dream about at night. Only during the day can I entertain the thought of what my life would be like without anxiety.
I think overall I would be a lot more fun to be around. I would be much more outgoing. I wouldn’t be so hesitant to do anything fun. Anything that could remotely get you in trouble is too worrisome for me to attempt. Even normal things are too hard to do like socializing with other women, eating, driving, etc.
If I had no anxiety, I would invite my favorite people over and entertain them with a home cooked meal and we would all sit down and eat together until we were stuffed. I would have so many friends that were girls, but only a handful would be my really close friends that I kept in touch with almost on a daily basis. We would go out to lunch all the time and have girls’ night out where we would go to the movies, hang out at my house, scrapbook, make crafts, watch chick flicks and eat chocolate. Any men that are reading can put the pillow fight fantasy away now ;)
I wouldn’t be so self conscious. I would love myself. I could wear my bathing suit and not be worried about how it looked on me.
I would enjoy the holidays with my family.
I would enjoy going on vacations and getaways.
I would have more energy to do more exciting things as opposed to watching so much TV.
I would be more assertive. I would give my opinion openly at work and around others and not let people use me as a doormat. I would tell people no if I really felt like it. I would still be kind and nice and want to help others, but I would respect myself enough to defend myself. I would confront people when they need to be confronted.
I would tell people that make fun of me exactly how their comments affect me and how it makes me feel towards them and my relationship with them even though it would be an awkward situation.
What would your dream world be without anxiety?
If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety
You might also like:
My Story
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
Stop the World I Wanna Get Off
Celebrate! Traveling with Anxiety- Trip # 5
Linkwithin