photo by sadalit
A new commenter to the blog recently asked some questions on Vitamin B. I thought rather than have a novel reply I would do a post on it so everyone can benefit. I have to say I am not a doctor so please don’t sue me for anything that I say and you do and it doesn’t work ;) Ok so what I am going to tell you is all from the Anxiety and Phobia Workbook. I will paraphrase it but he says it much more elegantly:

Vitamin B
When your body is going through stress it depletes stores of B and C vitamins rapidly. The B vitamins are necessary to help maintain the proper functioning of the nervous system. Deficiencies in Vitamin B can lead to anxiety, irritability, restlessness, fatigue, etc. There is more than one kind of Vitamin B. (B2, B6, B5, B12, etc.) It is best to take all eleven of the B vitamins together in a B-complex supplement since they tend to work together synergistically.

Vitamin C
Vitamin C enhances the immune system and promotes health from infection, disease, and injury as well as helps the adrenal glands. Your adrenal glands (when properly functioning) help you cope with stress. (Vitamin B5 also helps with the adrenal glands and many people find that taking it is helpful in dealing with excess stress)

So what and how much to take?
If interested here is what the Ph D says:

B-Complex: 50 to 100 mg of all eleven B vitamins once a day (twice a day under high stress)

Vitamin C: 1000 mg in a time release form, twice a day (double this dose under high stress)
Make sure you take them with meals so they can be broken down properly otherwise its useless.
You cannot overdose on B Vitamins as they are water soluble. The one exception to this is Vitamin B6. DO NOT exceed 100 mg per day if you are taking it on a long term basis. Repeated daily doses in excess of 8000 mg per day of Vitamin C have been associated with stomach complaints and kidney stones.
Hope that answers your question. If you have any more questions on this subject let me know :)



Did you find this article helpful?

yes, it answered my questions.

no I didn't find what I was looking for.



  
pollcode.com free polls
If you answered no, please leave a comment to let me know what you are looking for so I can help out.



If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety
You might also like:
Morning Anxiety
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
Anxiety Scale
Maintaining Control When Anxiety is Triggered
Linkwithin