WebEMDR.com is an on line provider of EMDR therapy for anxiety, stress,depression and PTSD. According to their website, EMDR is "Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing, or EMDR, is a powerful new short-term psychotherapy technique which has been very successful in helping people who suffer from trauma, anxiety, panic, disturbing memories, post traumatic stress and many other emotional problems. Until recently, these conditions were difficult and time-consuming to treat. EMDR is considered a breakthrough therapy because of its simplicity and the fact that it can bring quick and lasting relief for most types of emotional distress."

These sessions usually cost $18.00 each but they are giving 100 free sessions away to the loyal readers of The Reality of Anxiety!

How to get one of these free sessions:
Become a new follower either by subscribing via RSS or email, or by "following" the blog through blogger, or following through twitter. You will have to let me know if you do this by leaving me a comment with your email address and how you joined.
Leave a note on the discussion forum. This can be a response to someone else or a new topic altogether. Again I need an email address so I can contact you if you win.
Join the monthly challenge. Let me know you are joining by leaving a comment and what you plan to accomplish this month (plus your email address).
Disclaimer: All winners need to send me a valid email address so that they can be contacted of winnings and also to set up their session. I have been guaranteed that your email address will not be emailed by the company after your free session. There is no after session marketing or sharing of your email address. Only one free session per person.

These will be given away in first-come-first-serve style so hurry and enter!

This giveaway will be valid until March 2, 2010 (30 days).



If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email
You might also like:
Introducing My First Giveaway!!!!
November's Relaxation Giveaway!
And the Winner Is...
Ever Thought about Therapy by Phone?
Linkwithin