photo by ortizmj12
I would like to wrap up this mini series on working with our triggers, otherwise known as our big, hairy, mean, dark unnerving fears. If you have kept up with the last couple posts, then hopefully you’ve discovered what your triggers are and decided to not avoid them. So, you are now in a fearful situation where your triggers are triggering your anxiety. How do you maintain control? How do you stay there when you really want to run away? How do you face your fears?

I have written about this in many different ways here on the blog in my own journey to finding answers and has evolved into what the heart of this blog is all about. This is what we are all looking for, striving for- a way to live our lives without the constant feelings of panic that tag along wherever we may go. A way to not give into those fears and be able to enjoy ourselves. I am not all the way there yet, and truthfully I may never be. But I have learned how to minimize the effects that the panic has over me so it doesn't effect me as often or as tough as it used to, and that is a great step in the right direction. So lets share the knowledge. I've collected some of my most relevant, useful posts on the subject that has been the biggest help to me over time and I have listed them all in one place for your surfing convenience.
How to maintain control when anxiety is triggered:
Try to prevent panic before you go- Prevent Panic: Have a Game Plan
Do what is most comfortable and not whats expected- Don't Have Time For a Game Plan? Don't Back Down, but Be Yourself
Control your breathing with breathing exercises- Taking Deep Breaths
Recognize the negative self talk- Are We Talking Ourselves into Panicking? and replace it with your favorite positive affirmations- Master Rather Than Victim of Your Mind
Additional resources and ideas to incorporate into your daily life: My Top Ten Anxiety Resources
If it all is too overwhelming, leave the situation, but then remember to return when you start to feel better- The Importance of Not Avoiding Your Fears A.K.A. Triggers

Related Posts:
Ten Step Mental Exercise that will Reduce Panic
Discovering Your Triggers


If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety
You might also like:
The Importance of Not Avoiding Your Fears A.K.A. Triggers
Discovering Your Triggers
Anxiety Scale
Morning Anxiety
Linkwithin