On this Fourth of July I can't help but think about how lucky I am to live in this country. We may not be granted happiness, but we are given so many things that help us with the pursuit of it and isn't that what life is all about? Isn't that what we are all striving for every day? To find our own personal happiness, personal peace of mind and acceptance in this world.

When I went to India a few years back, my eyes were opened up to just how lucky I am. Walking through the streets I saw these children running amuck, dirty, unsupervised, barefoot and their clothes were hanging off of them. My hearts went out to them.
They loved getting their picture taken and seeing it on the camera. I went back a few months later and saw them again to my delight, but nothing had changed. Most everyone lived in cramped apartments and if you weren't that lucky you would be in a shanty or a small room made out of tin with a tarp for a roof. Your children would be playing in the sewers or helping you work doing construction. I came home to my 2 bedroom starter home with a raised ceiling and thought that I lived in a mansion and felt so unbelievably blessed. We all have our problems but I can't help but feel grateful today for all that our country offers us. Don't get me wrong, India is beautiful and has a very rich fascinating culture. However, the average person here in America lives a much richer life with streets that are clean, dogs that are put in shelters and not left to fill the streets, and food that isn't sold on the ground two feet next to the trash infested ditches.


So as you go to your family BBQ, the city parade or carnival, while watching the fireworks or seeing a movie, whatever your family tradition might be, look around at all that you have. Tomorrow might be full of complaints but maybe today we can just be grateful for our blessings and opportunities that make the Pursuit a little easier.

If interested here are some more of my pictures from India. Enjoy!



If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety