If you are not reading this at The Reality of Anxiety homepage you are reading stolen content. Please click here to be redirected to the original author's page.



I made it through my birthday without a panic attack. I didn't really do very much for it and maybe thats why. I kept it pretty low key. And although a part of me was sad that there was no party, no big dinner celebration where all the attention was on me and my existence, the majority of me was happy to just be panic free.

So I took the route of doing what I wanted. I took a half day of vacation from work and went out to the mountains with a couple of mt friends to take pictures of the fall scenery. I had been wanting to get up there before the weather got too cold, and photography is very relaxing for me. The weather was perfect. As I have said before, I am a big believer in taking up hobbies because they are very therapeutic and I think they help you to gain confidence. I personally enjoy photography, blogging, and playing the piano to name a few. Here are a couple shots that I took:



It was nice to have a panic attack free birthday for the first time in years.

In other news, I chopped my hair. I took off about three inches and I dyed it pretty dark with red highlights. Its about a shade darker than my natural color. Some days I really like it and others I think, "What have I done!?!"
I've gotten a lot of compliments but for some reason I rarely believe any of them. Its hard for me to accept compliments. I guess that goes back to my low self esteem, but I really think people are just being polite. And I'm not blogging about this because I am fishing for compliments, because like I said, I probably wouldn't believe you if you did. I do think its an interesting thought. Does anyone have a hard time excepting compliments? On the flip side, I don't give out compliments lightly. If I give a compliment to someone, I really do mean it. I can't stand it when people say they agree with or constantly praise either me or someone else just to break the ice, or an awkward silence, or to make people like them. Its so fake.

Well either way, I am not one to cry over a haircut.

Well I have rambled on long enough. I hope everyone has had a great weekend.

P.S. The buttons at the end of this post are different ways you can share my blog. Many people like to use social bookmarks like StumbleUpon, or Del.icio.us, or technorati. If you enjoy any of these services you can click on the button that represents the service you use to bookmark a page. Let me know if this is useful for you or a waste of space. Enjoy!

If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety