photo by TheConsumerist
You always see those commercials about the pharmacist going to your kids baseball game, showing how much they care about their patients, but you know its all bull. I usually get my prescriptions filled at the nearby Smiths grocery store, and it seems every time I go the people working there had no idea what they were doing. I have never been impressed.

However yesterday I had the first good experience at a Pharmacy. Due to the last week and a half of feeling completely miserable, I decided it was time to go see the doctor and make sure I didn't have strep throat or something that antibiotics could help with. After my doctors visit I went to Smiths to pick up my prescriptions. Ty got a new job but there is a trial period before his insurance kicks in, so I signed up with my company. But I didn't have the card to prove it since I signed up the day before. So the pharmacist told me until I could get them the information they needed, I would have to pay full price. This means I would have to pay almost 30 bucks for the medicine my doctor prescribed. Note that the medicine wasn't any antibiotics- I have a virus and the meds were to help me with my symptoms. The pharmacist told me how the medication worked and said "If I were you I would drink a lot of water and take some sudafed and that will do the same thing." I was taken aback that she would give me this tip. Its the difference of paying 30 dollars or 6. So I took her advice and didn't buy the full priced meds. She got me the sudafed I needed and sent me on my way. I have also been out of Zoloft for the last week but since we didn't have insurance I just never refilled my prescription- very naughty I know. I asked her if she could refill it and how much it would be full price and she gave me 3 pills and told me to figure out my insurance and to come back for the rest. I thought that was really nice of her to not leave me high and dry.

I hope she stays there for awhile. How about anyone else? Any horror stories or surprising stories about going to the pharmacist?

If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety or Add it to Your Technorati Favorites.
You might also like:
A Hard Pill to Swallow, Is Medication Right for You?
6 Tips for Going to the Doctor to Talk about Your Anxiety
Blog against Abuse Day
WARNING: Read the Side Effects and Do Your Research
Linkwithin