photo by Sam_Cat

This morning I absolutely hit rock bottom with my anxiety. I was a complete mess, thinking the most awful thoughts about how I must be losing my mind. I cried so hard and for so long that I just wore myself out emotionally. I could hardly move. Not to mention the anxiety wasn't letting me eat anything so I was pretty physically exhausted too. I couldn't get to the doctor quick enough.

Going to the doctor to talk about anxiety can be a little embarrassing. The first time I went to him about it a good three years ago I got all dolled up to look my best to try to seem like I had some part of my life together. I was vague about how serious my symptoms were and tried to come out of it with the best impression I could. After all I think it was the first time I had ever met this doctor and I didn't want him judging me.

Today, I was lucky to put makeup on. As soon as he walked into the room I started to cry. I told him everything and he had a lot of good insightful questions that he asked back. We talked about medication and what would be the best plan for me. I would like to say I am strong enough to go meds free but after the week I have had I know it is beyond me for right now and that if I want to be able to function properly I will need it.

I am no doctor but I have been to them ALOT! So, my advice for when you finally decide to talk to a doctor about your anxiety:
Don't let anyone make you feel ashamed for going to seek out medical advice or medication. Only you know whats best for your body and no one else has to live with the consequences of what you do or don't do but you.
Don't go to an instacare because they won't give out medication for mental health issues since they are potentially addictive and they would rather you see your family doctor.
Go with a list of all your questions, even the silly ones and ask them.
Tell him all your symptoms, what you think causes the attacks, and what you would like to do about it. Its important he knows all the history and that you are both on board with whatever plan is decided on.
If you don't like the experience, find another doctor. I wasn't suprised at how comforting and understanding my doctor was about the whole thing because he really is an awesome person. We are lucky to have him as our family doctor. When you are at rock bottom, you NEED someone that makes you feel like you have value and you are not just another patient on his to do list. I have been to the instacare plenty of times and talked with plenty of doctors where I walked away feeling stupid or embarrassed, etc.
If the medication you were given isn't working or is too much, go back and try something else. It could be a dosage change or a different drug. But don't think the first thing you try will change your life. It may, but it may take some time and tweaking to figure out what works best for you.


If you enjoyed this post Get the Reality of Anxiety via RSS or Email
You might also like:
A Hard Pill to Swallow, Is Medication Right for You?
Blog against Abuse Day
WARNING: Read the Side Effects and Do Your Research
Pharmacists Might Care After All
Linkwithin