photo by Emdashes.com

Alright I am stealing this idea from Debaser’s blog My Brain: My Friend, My Enemy, but I can’t help it. I think its such a cool idea. At least I am giving credit where credit’s due. What I do is respond to all the search queries that people entered into their favorite search engine that led them to my blog. This way I can answer any questions people might have in case they couldn’t find it on the blog. It’s amazing to me that you can even see this kind of info and it’s always cool to see what others are wondering about. So here goes my first attempt. In the last week here are the following queries:
“morning anxiety”- sucks doesn’t it? I have a post that describes my morning anxiety as well as some suggestions for how to get over it that you might want to look at.
“rude to tell someone too thin”- whoever this person is I agree whole heartedly with them. I’ve said it before in my post "My Story" and "Absolutely Unapologetically Thin" that people think they are giving you a compliment because most people are trying to lose weight but really you are just telling someone there is something wrong with them and they are not good enough the way they are. They are not “normal”. Whether we realize it or not that can have effect on our overall self esteem and feeling of self worth if we start to believe them.
“anxiety and not hungry”- I think a lot of stress and anxiety result in symptoms showing themselves in our digestive track. When I get anxious I get nauseous. I’ve heard other people refer to “stomach attacks” for their anxiety attacks. The last thing I want to do when I am feeling anxious is eat. So you are not alone.
“clonozapam”- best drug on the planet, it saved my sanity.
“how to stop victim thinking”- again I have a post that explains a way to stop thinking of yourself as a victim and how to become master of your mind. It’s all about how to stop your negative thinking and reprogram your brain.
“I suffer with waking anxiety that goes away by noon”- I think this person like many of us suffers from morning anxiety and would benefit from reading the post I mentioned earlier that has suggestions of how to overcome the anxiety that you start your day with.
“I wish I could push myself more”- This person probably didn’t find what they were looking for since one of my affirmations is: There’s no need to push myself. Otherwise I put too much pressure on myself which causes anxiety because I feel like I have to be perfect.
So that’s it for this week of searches. I hope you find this as interesting as I do!
If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety
You might also like:
Question Box
Even More About Morning Anxiety: Its All About Your Attitude
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
If it's Your Birthday, You Can Be More Prone to Panic
Linkwithin