It has come to my attention that there is a website out there that automates all of my content onto their website. Now normally I love links back to my site or when someone mentions a post I did or reposts one of my posts on their blog. However this isn't anything like that. This website just takes whatever post I have done and posts it as their own on their website with ads everywhere so they are making money off of my blog. That bothers me because I don't have ads on this blog and if anyone should be making money off my content it should be me.

So why am I bothering all of you with this? Because I cannot get this person to stop, so I am hoping that they will see this post when they steal it and get the hint. I have emailed everyone I know of to try to stop them but I haven't heard back from anyone. Not even Google who is sponsoring her ads has responded to my 2 emails I sent them.

The website in question is www.fearaid.org. If you are currently on this website and viewing my content, I would urge you to check out the real thing, cause it is much better. My website is at http://anxiousnomore.blogspot.com.

I don't want to dwell too much on this as it deters from the real focus of this blog, but I felt a post was necessary to try to get the word out.

In the future if anyone wants to use my content, I don't mind a link back or a repost (I encourage them in fact), but reposting all of my new content daily is a problem.

Has anyone else ever had this kind of problem? I know Debaser has and luckily he was able to get a hold of Google to stop it. Unfortunately this person's personal email address generated nothing, isp service was unreachable, and I am at a dead end.

If you enjoyed this post Subscribe to The Reality of Anxiety or Add it to Your Technorati Favorites.

If you are not reading this at The Reality of Anxiety homepage, please click here to be redirected to the original author's page.
You might also like:
What to Do When Feeling Overwhelmed
White and Nerdy- Exciting Blog Updates
Blog against Abuse Day
My Story
Linkwithin