 How To; Convince Your Parents


I will start off by saying first and foremost "Just Doing It" or "Doing it Anyway" is not something I recommend, but I would be calling the kettle black if I said I didn't do this once in my lifetime.

So you want your parents to let you have a piercing, but you have no idea how to convince them or everything you have already tried has done you dirty? Don't fret ghouls and girls I have a few pointers that may (or may not) help you out a little in pushing your parents towards letting you have one.
I will link my YouTube video discussing these pointers as well to this blog so you can watch it and whatnot, (do that here >>>> RIGHT HERE! but in this blog I will give a few examples of what I mean as opposed to just "My 5 Key Pointers".
That, however, is where we will start off;

Michelle's 5 Key Pointers to Convince Your Parents to let You get Pierced.

#1. Have an Educated Speech:
#2. Best Time for the Piercing (Especially if still in school)
#3. Stipulate a Contract or Agreement
#4. Show Pictures and Discuss how it can be Hidden or Covered
#5. Explain Process and Maybe even go to Parlors
Lets just start off at number and 1 and go down the list. I will break down everything stated above so hold on to your socks!

Have and Educated Speech

If you just go to your parents and say... "I really want one", "They're not even that bad", "So and so has one", "I can always just take it out if it becomes a big problem", and hoopblah like that, there is no reason your parents should be swayed on letting you get your body stabbed. That's whiny and sounds very bratty (for one) and a little irresponsible even. So the best thing you can do is go with a list of educated facts and sit them down, explaining why you should be able to get the piercing and why it really isn't "That big of a deal".
If you are trying to sway your parents on letting you get snakebites, then make sure you can dish out just about every fact you know (or researched on a legitimate body mod website) about the piercing. Set up a table that weighs out the pros and cons.

Pros; Its a set of oral piercings located on the lower lip. Oral piercings tend to heal easily and aren't a huge hassle to take care of. (Continue list here)

Cons; The lip can sometimes swell up a lot and make the bars uncomfortable (BUT luckily sipping on a cold Icee or Slurpee helps reduce a lot of that swelling.) -(Continue list here)

You get the picture. Basically just make sure you let them know everything you can possibly let them know about it and so on.

Best Time to Get Pierced

 If you are trying to convince your parents to let you get a piercing my next most immediate thought (after you being under the age of legal consent to sign the papers yourself) is that you're still in school. Whether it is fast approaching high school or high school itself (as usually you have to be at LEAST 15 with parental consent to get a piercing) you must still be studying at the institution. So with that being said, there is usually a good time to get pierced, instead of getting pierced in the middle of the school year and having to hide it or take it out. Some schools don't mind piercings but others have strict dress code rules against (I know my high school did). If you are in school, tell your parents the average healing time of a piercing you are trying or wanting to get, and tell them what you think is the best time to get it.
Unless it is a tongue ring or a septum, or something easily hidden by clothes, I would recommend that you suggest getting it during a break of at least 2 weeks. So usually around December holidays or during the summer.

Stipulate a Contract or Agreement

 Sometimes it takes a fair trade to convince parents to let you have something. This method of earning it not only gets you a piercing (or whatever else you may want) but also guarantees your parents that you will do something in return. Now don't get me wrong parents may lie sometimes and agree to let you get a piercing in exchange for one favor or another (usually to your benefit whether its grades or other) but that would be teaching bad morals like lying! ):< So hopefully the agreement you both reach is valid and you can work something out to satisfy your piercing wants.

Show A Picture and Explain How to Cover/Hide It

Sometimes a really effective way to convince them its not that bad is to show them what it actually looks like. It can be really beneficial to just show a picture of the piercing in place on a person (don't show them someone heavily pierced, just maybe that one piercing) and explain how it can easily be hidden. I know my parents were very anti nose ring and also very anti microdermal but upon actually seeing how little and cute the piercing was they didn't mind it all that much. So sometimes the best thing to do is rub it in their face. In the nicest way of course!

Explain Process and Introduce to Parlors

Let them know the process of the piercing. This includes the actual piercing process, explain how it is sterilize, done, and taken care of. It's always good to have information on how the piercing is done and the healing time of it. If you need any help explaining, try to convince your parents to go to a parlor with you and talk to a piercer. The professionals are trained to handle situations like this. If you get stabbed they get paid, and who doesn't like getting paid to stab someone else. (LOL totally serial killer)

These are the best pointers I can offer to help you swoon your parental units. I did not including convincing them on ear stretching, as I find it to be a totally different ballpark and I find that many people don't know the best ways to go about it so that may end up being an entirely other post all its own.

If you have any questions or need any advice however, feel free to email me at;

catacatlysmic@live.com

Or you can follow my social media links! :)

Insta; catacatlysmic
Twitter;  MsMichelleVegas
YouTube; Michelle Vegas

Again thanks for reading and stay spooky!! :)