So you're thinking about a getting a new piercing? You're thinking a lip ring would look good, or maybe a cute nose ring because that one girl you saw at wal mart had one. You really, really, REALLY want one, but don't want to the pay price to get it done at a shop.
I would first and foremost like to say I do NOT recommend piercing yourself if you have no experience or training and are just doing it at home without taking necessary steps in precaution. That is why people take their time in learning and getting licensed to do piercings. I do know however (as I myself have gone through the periods/phases of REALLY wanting a piercing at a much cheaper price than shop prices) that no matter what a licensed professional, myself, or anyone else says there are people out there who are so dead set and determined to be pierced and will do it at home by themselves or a friend or someone else who pierces everyone and so on...So I am writing this blog to help those who will be receiving a do it yourself piercing practice safer methods and hopefully promote why getting a professional to do the piercing is so much easier in the long run. Like I said though, no matter what, there will always be people who choose doing it themselves. Which brings us to the blog...


SO YOU WANT A DIY PIERCING?


Do it yourself piercings make me hold my head and go errrgh!!! But I have done them myself on multiple occasions. Usually whenever my parents didn't want to give me consent to get them professionally done. So lets start there. If your parents are NOT willing to give their consent and you are under the age of 18 (unless your local shop has a different age of consent) I do no recommend or condone piercing yourself. If anything, before you just do it, I suggest trying to convince them why the piercing is okay, or why you think you should be allowed to have the piercing etc. etc. I will discuss how to convince your parents to let you have a piercing in another blog later on.
I did all of my facial piercings other than my microdermal which was done at a shop. My venoms were also done at a shop. I've had my canines pierced time and time again, and there is plenty of scare tissue that had built up, so when I finally repierced them this last time, I used a 13.5g needle to accommodate my 14g studs on my angel bites, and the snakebites are 16g. My septum is a 16g, and my nostril are pierced at a 22g. ((I did study at a tattoo parlor where I learned how to perform piercings/about cross contamination/sterilization of tools)).

So what I recommend doing first if you're going to pierce yourself is to make a check list of the appropriate tools required, an effective method of sterilization, and proper instructions for aftercare of the piercing. I cannot stress enough how unsafe it is to use a "safety" pin for piercing yourself, or using a needle that is not appropriately packaged. There are several places online to buy sterilized packaged needles, and even at a local tattoo/piercing store or kiosk. Buy the disposable, inexpensive clamps if you are not willing to put forth a little more money for the metal ones.
NEVER RE-USE NEEDLES ((OR CLAMPS THAT ARE NOT PROPERLY AND I MEAN PROPERLY STERILIZED))

Since it's an at home piercing, I cannot stress enough how important it is that everything is sterile. Do not use needles that are not packaged upon purchase as they are likely not sterile. Piercings are different, and sometimes piercings sold at kiosks or shopping malls etc. are not pre-packaged. It is essential that you soak these in rubbing alcohol to rid them of germs and bacteria that may be on the metal. Make sure your clamps are clean also.

PLEASE FOR THE LOVE OF EVERYTHING UNHOLY WEAR GLOVES!!!

Even cosmetic gloves sold at little beauty shops will do. Wash your hands before anything and properly dry them but I do suggest wearing gloves. You can even order boxes of "piercing/medical" gloves online for super cheap.

All the jewelry ((Excluding microdermal)) seen here was purchased at a small shop in my town for 10$. Yep, ten whole dollars, WHAT?! The needles for all jewelry...5$. The box of 100 extra small gloves that I use anytime I pierce myself...8$. The clamps I use for myself...12$. So it's really all within a reasonable budget. All about 35$, which in my town is about the base charge of a single piercing at a parlor in my town. While I understand it is cheaper to do it yourself, the risk can be far greater. If you don't believe me, just look up infected piercings.

Before anyone brings it up, I would just like to say, sometimes a shop does a piercing that gets infected and whether it is the shops piercer's fault or the after care of the piercee it is not a beautiful thing. Not all DIY piercings end in infections. Just to be clear.

Aftercare of piercings varies depending where it is located obviously. So I won't go over that in this blog. Prior care to piercings, meaning the proper sterilization of the area about to be stabbed is important however. If you are a female...CLEAN OFF ALL MAKEUP FROM THE AREA. Shower first, or use a good makeup remover and clean clean clean the area. Afterwards, run over it with an alcohol swab. Make sure it is clean of any makeup, dirt, or whatever else like sweat.
Boys...pretty much the same goes for you. Clean the area thoroughly and rid yourself of any dirt or sweat or makeup or whatever you wear.

If it is an oral piercing then please rinse your mouth with an alcohol based mouth wash for 30 seconds. Don't be nasty.

I do recommend using clamps instead of just stabbing yourself in the face or wherever and using your fingers to hold the skin. I know clamps are poopy and uncomfortable but please bite the bullet and use them.
I don't suggest piercing friends especially without prior experience, knowledge, or know-how. People are trained and get paid to do this. Infections can occur and they suck.

I don't really have Q&A for this one. I tend to let people ask me on their own about this subject. With that being said, if you have any questions about DIY piercings, feel free to email me at catacatlysmic@live.com and follow my new YoutTube channel where I will post videos about my blog/life/tattoos,piercings and the like!!


YOUTUBE CHANNEL

HOW TO PIERCE YOURSELF VIDEO

Its not fancy or nothing yet so don't laugh >:|

Like I said though, if you are about to pierce yourself or someone else and have any questions about any part of the process ((healing, aftercare, prior care, clamps, needles, hoopblah)) please email and don't be afraid to ask!!! Thanks to all the people who read my blog! I appreciate it! I will be making a video going over this blog soon! :)

-michelle