So I was contacted by a company called Pura D'or and asked to try out some of their products for a review! They sent me a bottle of shampoo, conditioner, and Argan Oil. I will post pictures of the products below and give my review and description of each! :)

THIS IS A CRUELTY FREE PRODUCT!!!


This is the shampoo that Pura D'or sent me, and let me tell you something about how enchanting this smells. It doesn't have your typical Bath and Body Works scent, or the average fruity essence of other store bought brands. This shampoo actually has a fragrance reminiscent (to me at least) of hotel swimming pools. While the chlorine scent may not be for everyone, I think it's absolutely amazing. I've always liked the freshness of the smell, so this shampoo was a 10/10 in my book as far as that goes. It also doesn't take too incredibly much to coat my entire hair either, and it leaves it feeling very thick and very clean as well. I have relatively thick hair, not too heavy but not too thin either, and working any shampoo through my mane is a task in itself. The bottles are also the kind you pump instead of the kind you squeeze, just if you didn't already know. I don't know why, but I feel like that is important to state.





This is the conditioner that Pura D'or sent me along with the shampoo and Argan Oil. This is definitely my favorite of the trio because it smells like Lavender, and if you didn't know now you do; Lavender helps relieve stress, anxiety, and is calming. The scent on the bottle is Lavender Vanilla, but in all honestly it smells more like what Heaven would smell like if you packed it into a little bottle and sold it off as conditioner. The conditioner required me to use a bit more than the shampoo did because my thick hair took a lot of working through to saturate. So if your hair is thick, definitely be generous in your usage of this product. It did however leave, not only a majestic scent that wafted from my head all day long, but a luster in my hair that I haven't seen in quite some time. I rate this overall a 9/10, only because it requires so much to envelope my entire head...sigh, such is life.



Last is the Argan Oil, and I have a few pointers when using this product. I'm very forgetful when it comes to moisturizing my exceedingly dry skin; which is only exceedingly dry because the weather in good ole Texas is confused and goes through four seasons in one week. The Argan Oil really only takes a pump or two to cover your entire face and neck and about the same amount per arm and leg. With this product, if you wear makeup, I suggest putting it on at night to ensure soft skin throughout the next day. HOWEVER; I don't advise that you put this on right before doing your makeup. I tried it out to see if it would help the makeup glide on smoother, but it actually made the base and foundation blotchy. It's great for making your skin soft and ready for makeup the next morning if you put it on overnight though. I rate this a 9/10 simply because it's awesome but I wish desperately that it didn't make my makeup blotchy and hard to wipe off.



Watch my unscripted live action review right here.

Also you should check out my twitter and my instagram because I NEVER tweet but I do occasionally post my face on the instaweb!

Twitter/Instagram; @msmichellevegas

Also check out the company's website here: Pura D'or Website

 Thanks for reading this post and I will make sure to share some more of my fun adventures, reviews, and advice with you guys soon!

-Michelle