Angel bites, double monroes, monroe piercings, whatever you call them! Lets discuss how they work and what their healing time and process is like! Whilst I sit here and smoke my life away, and at the same time realize how detrimental holding a cigarette in between my fingers is to my typing abilities, I figured I'd share my story about my angel bites, a.k.a. double monroes, healing process and how I like them. I don't quite have pictures or anything of the actual healing process itself, but I have several pictures of the bites!


As you can see I have relatively long bars in my angels, the kind that are typically used for healing, but that just leaves me room to make quite a few faces without the piercings suffocating my non existent lips. They get called antennas by my friends and boyfriend but what the hell ever. I'll just stab them in their stupid pupils next time I head butt the crap outta them for calling them antennas. Not all bars are this long though, so if you don't want to join my antenna group don't fret, there are shorter bars out there! Now lets talk about how I got these piercings and why I adore them so much!
As you can somewhat see, once upon a time like...2 years ago, I had only tiny blue ball on my face. Along with one tongue ring and two snakebites. Then after much hard thought, I decided to take out the snakebites and just keep the monroe. I personally think they are some of the cutest piercings you can have. They're simple little upper lip piercings that add just a dash of pizazz to your everyday wardrobe but.....
I didn't like the placement of my monroe at all. Granted I did it myself and at one time had all four, meaning angel bites and snakebites, it just sat too low on the lip area. So after having it out for about a full 10 1/2 minutes before getting my angel bites I decided I wanted to raise them up just a bit higher. The bites I have now still aren't quite as high as people get them but they're high enough to fit my liking.
Now I will say on the pain scale they're about a solid 5 or 6. Reason being, there is quite a few nerves on the upper lip and yes they weren't all that comfortable to get. They did make my eyes water and it was about 10 deep breaths later that I was ready to get the second side of my upper lip pierced. But to this day I love them quite a bit! I can't find any reason to complain! Not even the occasional getting the right end of the bar stuck under a tooth! It actually gives quite a cute expression and makes my lips seem pouty :c
This is their new placement and about I'd say....almost a full year later. They are fully healed, and don't cause any problems! They don't scratch against my gums, nor do they clink against my teeth! And I just cannot get over how much I love them as a team! ;p So now lets get into some of the healing process and then questions and answers!
They do swell just in case you're wondering! Not too incredibly bad, but enough to make you look like you got some lip injections! The bars given at the time of the piercing will be rather long and unpleasant looking, but its all in good favor! If they didn't give you long bars your new piercings would cut into your lip! Eating isn't a challenge at all with lip rings most of the time but there might be a thing or two that makes you rather unhappy! Drinking through straws shouldn't be a total pain in the ass but on a few occasions may make you cringe.
The first day shouldn't be all that bad as the swelling has only begun and the piercings haven't had to endure to much of your ravenous tossing and turning and rubbing your face into the pillow at nighttime! The second day, yes they will be swollen and no they might not be that pleasant but hey....its pretty, right?
The next couple of days are fairly the same as the second day with minimal interference in your everyday life! Like licking your lips on a hot day because they are chapped. Ouch!
After about a week the swelling reduces and the bars become more antenna like and protrude further out of your lip as it calms down from the trauma of the needle before forcefully asserted. (:
There is really no problem you should have dealing with this piercing or getting this piercing. The only thing is it might leave a small mark for some people. Whether you've had it for 2 days or had it for a lifetime, when you take them out the scar tissue will be there just like any piercing!
I'd say the healing process is about 2 weeks but I'd leave them in until the swelling is completely gone and they aren't sore to the touch or tender!

Question and Answer time!

Q; Did they hurt to get?
A; Yes, but not terribly!

Q; How do you care for them?
A; Like my own. But in all seriousness, rinsing with salt water and diluted mouthwash about twice a day is a good way to take care of them. I would also recommend using a q-tip with salt water or H20cean sea salt spray to clean around the top of the lip ring just in case you get crusties!

Q; How long do they take to heal?
A; Roughly two weeks!

Q; Why two at the same time? Is just getting one going to be about the same as getting two?
A; Because I love my symmetry! And while they are similar, I wouldn't say getting one is the same as getting two. Just simply for the fact that your lip is suffering more trauma while getting two of them!

Q; What if the bar is cutting into my lip on the bottom?
A; I would suggest trying to wear longer bars. If its cutting into the bottom of lip while still swollen because its a new piercing, I would talk to your piercer about the next step. If its cutting into your lip because the bar is to short after it is healed, try searching for longer bars. You don't want the skin to start trying to grow over it!

If you have any questions or feel like I should add something to this blog or this post email me at catacatlysmic@live.com! Follow my instagram @catacatlysmic or add my facebook;
https://www.facebook.com/catacatlysmic.


Thanks for reading, and let me know what I should blog about next? More piercings? Tattoos? Gauges and such?!

Stayed Inked and Pierced,
Michelle Michaelis <3