Sorry for being gone for so long. Don't be mad, instead enjoy a picture of my hairy, curled up pussweh.

Okay, so sorry for the long accidental hiatus. What I mean by accidental is I totally forgot to check my email related to this blog, as well as I forgot having the blog all together. Until recently, I was quite busy with work and school, a little bit of life on the side, I just completely forgot that I was chronicling my piercing journey. Just a couple of days ago I got asked about all my piercings while walking around the mall and it reminded me hey! I totally was blogging over that very subject like a year ago. So here I am, reading through the several emails that I received and completely forgot to answer ((SORRY SORRY SORRY)), and noticing that my blog got a pretty decent amount of views in the year I was away. 
With that being said (or typed), I also decided I would start VLOGGING to go along with my blog and hopefully it will help me keep track of my actual blog better. So once I start my Youtube Channel and all that good stuff I will link my videos in my blog and link my blog in my videos. :D
Anyway, it's time to get back to the point of this post.

MY MICRODERMAL(S)


So if you're thinking about getting a microdermal (sorry for the crappy close up I had to crop), here is the best advice I can give you about the actual piercing, the healing time, the two different ways I've had it pierced (and the first ones removal), and the cleaning/after care.
I unfortunately don't have pictures of when I first got my microdermal, but I will put what few pictures I do have where you can actually see the piercing and my hair isn't in the way. 
So microdermals, also referred to as dermal anchors, are piercings that do not have an entrance and an exit. What I mean by that is that it hooks into place (thus being an anchor) and only requires one puncture wound. The nifty part about dermal anchors is you can get them practically anywhere on your body. Near the eye, on the clavicle (collar bones), nape of the neck, hips, back or wherever else your little heart desires. 
I think these are fabulous piercings, not high maintenance and pretty subtle. The piercing process is relatively fast if your piercer decides to biopsy punch  rather than use the bevel of the needle to create the space in which the piercing will sit. I have had two microdermals, each done by a different piercer, and have experienced both of these methods. 
(If you have experienced a dermal anchor another way that is also effective I would love to hear about it! [:)
In short, I prefer biopsy punch and will explain why as soon as I go over the other method and why I didn't feel it was quite as efficient nor would I recommend it. The bevel of a needle, for those of you who are wanting an anchor as a first piercing and have no prior piercings or experience with them, is the sharp point of the hollow needle. When getting a microdermal done this way, the piercer uses the bevel of the needle (not the whole needle) to create a pocket, basically, in your skin. Roughly half of the bevel is used to create this pocket, not the whole bevel in my experience. The piercer will create a T-shape, as that is how dermal anchors look.


(On a side note before I continue; There are a few places I have come across that are starting to use jewelry for the dermal anchors that are more T-shaped with both sides of the anchor being equivalent in length instead of one short side. It has come to my attention that these are to try and help the piercings from migrating and rejecting from some people's skin.)
Once the pocket is created the piercer will work the anchor into place and kind of give it a little twist until it POPS! into the correct position! The only reason I highly recommend biopsy punching as opposed to this method is because with biopsy punching its not as much trauma (in my opinion), less likely to bruise if you have sensitive skin, and I feel the healing time is faster and the soreness afterwards is substantially less.
I took out my first dermal due to professional reasons and I removed it myself. I do not recommend removing your own dermal if you have no experience with piercings and the care they require to not receive infection. If you have a microdermal you want removed I highly suggest going to your original piercer (or another trained professional) and having them remove it for you with proper instructions on aftercare.
With my second one, as I will show you below in a selfie, I got the amazing biopsy punch!


This is many months after receiving it and it being perfectly healed. I did not receive it on the same side as my last. Moving on, the initial piercing time, healing time, and soreness of the piercing was a thousand times faster, better, and easier than the first. A biopsy punch, for those of you who don't know, is basically a hole punch for your skin. For dermals, since they are really tiny piercings, the biopsy punch is not large. If you question what they look like I will post a picture below as soon as I am done describing them for those who are curious. It is, like I said, a hole punch for skin instead of paper. Your piercer will inform you about them if you have any other questions, but to get the big question of how does it work out of the way...
the circular bottom of the tool is very, razor, sharp. It only takes a little bit of effort on the professional's side, a few little twists and BOOM! A little chunk of your skin is removed in no time, allowing for your piercer to have easy access when placing your dermal anchor. 


This was the fastest part of the piercing for me, while setting it only took a hair longer. The piercer does have to set it properly, usually feeling a little click (you'll probably feel it too). 
The first piercer that did my dermal said biopsy punches created too much open space, causing the piercing to be more susceptible to infection, but I feel as long as you clean them properly you should be just fine and your piercer will give you specific instructions on care. Just follow them properly like I said. 
The healing time on this piercing, I would say was roughly two weeks for me. I estimate that by the piercings soreness, the time it took for the crusties to go away, and just the overall feeling of me not having to clean the piercing twice a day. When you first get a dermal done, you will be careful to not wash or dry your face roughly when cleaning your makeup (if you're a girl) and showering, and to not lay on the side where it is pierced for a little while. Cleaning with sea salt spray on a Q-tip, or getting a little cup of water with sea salt and running it over the piercing is a gentle and effective way to clean the piercing and get rid of the crusties that form. Like I said your piercer will really recommend the proper way for you to clean it. I do HIGHLY recommend after it is healed to clean it thoroughly at least once a week. The dead skin, dirt, and whatever else is on your face will buildup around the stud and stinks like ear cheese if you don't clean it. :x
Overall, this has been my experience with both of my dermal anchors, how I would recommend caring for them and how I cared for mine, and the best advice I can give about wanting one and how the whole process of pierce time to heal time goes!!
Now for Q&A

Q; Does a biopsy punch hurt more than a bevel?
A; In my opinion not one bit. I think all piercings pain level depends on the pain tolerance the person receiving it has. I'd rather be biopsy punched and the pain be quick and simple than have a needle consistently dug into my face.
Q; How do they set the anchor?
A; Your piercer will twist and wiggle the piercing until they feel what seems like a little "click" letting them know the piercing is place. It does tug on the skin a little and for me has been the longest part of the piercing, and it usually doesn't take more than a minute.
 Q; What does migrating or rejecting mean?
A; Sometimes, even when a piercing is done correctly, the body/skin does not accept the piercing and will cause it to migrate or move closer to the surface of the skin. This is your body rejecting the piercing. If this starts happening I highly suggest a visit to your piercer.
Q; Can you change the top of the jewelry?
A; Yes! The tops typically screw off the anchor and can be replaced with new studs!
Q; Do you recommend any part of the body over another part for this piercing?
A; Absolutely not. Your body, your rules. I think dermals anywhere are cute.
Q; Mine wiggles a little bit, is that normal or safe?
A; I have had no problems with mine wiggling around. Unless it is to the point where the anchor inside your skin is wiggling like a loose tooth, I wouldn't feel to worried. But if you are greatly concerned a call to the tattoo parlor can't be bad!

If you have anymore questions or if I haven't helped you decide if you want one or not, please feel free to email me at catacatlysmic@live.com, or follow me on instagram @catacatlysmics! I will start linking my youtube channel to this blog and will start linking my blog to my channel, where I will go over all three of my post again in a video and hopefully be more descriptive and answer anymore questions you guys have!! Again, I greatly apologize for slacking and not responding to the emails I had received. SO SORRY :,[ 
Thanks for reading and I hope you enjoy!! :D

-Michelle.