I'm sad this morning because Kathleen and I had a little misunderstanding last night, whose reverberations greeted me upon awakening. I take my response for normal, but given my recent history, I may be forgiven if I fear relapse at the touch of normal sadness.

Two good signs: I wrote a new song this week, and this morning, violating my vow, a poem as well. At least I think it's a poem:


Treated for ADD (For Tiel)

For ten days my mind and body
have tasted synchronicity
(usually one runs before or behind
like the trains in Mexico).

Everything I’ve bruised, broken,
bent, spilled, shoved, poked or kno-
cked over--it was not a lack of Zen
that propelled and dispropelled me--
my RPMs were running amok.
God bless amphetamines!


I also stayed up too late last night, a carry-over habit from depression. While in the throes of the illness I feel better later in the evening, thus desperately try to avoid sleep, knowing I will be sick when I wake. It is not surprising that after our spat I reverted to this behavior--then maybe one has nothing to do with the other; for most of my life I have willfully resisted my body's signal to sleep. I feel as if I'm going to miss out on something if I sleep.

(I really need to feed the rhododendrons and azaleas today but there are so many and I have to do it bucket by bucket.)

I've been listening to "Breakfast with the Beatles" this morning, an old tradition of mine and perhaps a bit of a substitute for church. One hour of it was devoted to Ringo's new album, Liverpool 8. Are you surprised that this is his 14th studio album?

Ringo is an example of a celebrity by association; without John, Paul and George he wouldn't have made a single album. It could also be argued that without John and Paul, George would likely never have made an album as well. Hitch your wagon to a genius.

I should visit some friends' blogs. I joined Facebook at someone's urging but I still don't know how to behave or network through it. Some say this idea of a universal interactive platform, accessible from any computer like U-tube, represents "Web 2.0." I think there has been a more gradual evolution of applications (though the idea of a one-digit leap in net concept corresponds nicely to its digital nature).

"Love is all you need." You could do worse on a Sunday morning than to listen to the Beatles.


Good Day Sunshine,

CE