I know my last post of 2500 some words on the intricacies of poetic theory repelled the average reader, though I doubt any of my readers are average. Yet the more I write for purpose, either publication or pay or both, the less I blog. Thus the frequency of my blogging, as my mood continues to be improved, must either fall or its matter more compress. I prefer the latter.

I don't like toilet paper so I use baby wipes for my business. But the title of the latest box I bought was too much to take: "Little Kisses." (I hope candy kisses are not implied, though they are at least hidden by tin foil, not visible through the translucent wipe.)

Kenyon the dog won't go out in the rain unless he really has to go. But in concert with the falling moisture, he will only go number one and not number two. If rain continues I'm confident that constipation will eventually be an adequate motivator, but he shall surely pay for the dereliction with increased straining and consequent pain to his hips. Hey, once you start potty talk it's hard to stop.

I hate brandy because I drink too much of it, while wine, which I like less, is more manageable. Samuel Johnson said, "No man is a hypocrite in his pleasures." That doesn't mean being honest about your pleasures makes you feel any better.

I'm going to undertake finishing the second half of my airport novel (thriller) in hopes of making money again. Sydney Sheldon recently died and needs a replacement, so I've heard from the angels.

I'm sorry I haven't visited more blogs lately. Reciprocity is good and good for one's narcissism. I'll get around to it. And if you have a blog you want me to check out, please write.

The art of writing is so outmoded by text communication and grammarless, breathless e-mail messages, know that in even reading my fairly literate blog that you are part of a diminishing minority. Fahrenheit 451.

I've been reading Walden Pond. Thoreau, in his way, is very funny, especially when satirizing the unnecessary "getting and spending" of the rich, or even modestly successful.


At 1 Kilobunny,

CE