Sat out in the sun for too long! Kidding, but it should be clear why I did this once you start reading the post!



The human body is a very clever thing. I'm aware that isn't a groundbreaking statement, but it's something I've been thinking about recently so bare with me. Our bodies are capable of telling us when something is wrong. If it's a sunny day and our skin starts to burn we know its time to head into the shade, if we've been feasting on junk food and start to feel sluggish and bloated we know its time to eat a bit healthier, and if our urine (sorry!) is looking a bit too yellow its time to get a big glass of water.


But what about when our bodies are sending us new kinds of messages, ones that aren't of the norm (that we know of). Of course if more people talked about strange occurrences of the body then they'd become the norm. I've had acute tinnitus for months now; a constant ringing in the ears. It sounds mad, but at first I thought it was one of those high pitch noises that only young people pick up on. But then I realised that I hear that noise all day long, it prevents me from falling asleep and recently I realised that I can hear it over music playing or the sounds from a tv. The best way I can describe it is that its akin to the sound of a washing machine on a super fast spin cycle, when its going so fast it sounds as if it's about to take off. Hearing that in the house can be pretty irritating, so if we can, we simply shut the door on it and get on with our day.

However, I can't do that. It's my constant companion, although definitely not a friend of mine. I feel like an absolute nut when I talk about it, especially when I mistook it as something everyone could hear for months. Of course I've mentioned it to my GP, they thought perhaps it was a side effect of a drug I was taking (the DEVIL drug) and that I should simply wait and see if the ringing stopped when I was completely weened off said drug. I'm now free of the devil drug, not quite free of its nasty withdrawal side effects, and yet the alarm bells are still going off in my ears. I may well be a hypercondriac, after-all I seem to have the worst track history when it comes to illnesses, and Google M.D. (haha hardly) has enabled me to scare myself silly with the results it comes up with when I've typed in my symptoms.

Sometimes we all get that feeling that something really isn't right with our bodies, call it instinct, a gut feeling that this isn't just an annoying noise I have to live with. I'd really like this spin cycle to end now. Has anyone else experienced this? If so, how did/do you cope with it? I really hope there are some people out there reading these blog posts and relating to them in some way. Otherwise I'm just having a good old natter to myself online! Feel free to comment below or send a message directly to me at cheerfulchelsea@outlook.com if you're prefer to keep your message private. When I first started reading blogs I was reluctant to comment due to fear of what others would think if they read what I had said, so I fully understand if others aren't ready to reach out. I'd love it if at some point we could build a nice online community and talk freely about these topics without fear of what others might say.