Photos of My Little Box's November 'Cosy Box', mentioned below. 


Tis the season of giving and loving, and having, and sharing, and receiving (Joey's minster speech, anyone?) Its just over a week to go until its the most wonderful time of the year. But for some it can be an incredibly lonely time, even when surrounded by family and friends, those living with anxiety and depression can feel incredibly isolated and generally feeling like no-one really 'gets' them, especially if its still all a big secret. Obviously Christmas is a time that we spend with loved ones, we get a bit merry, have a few heated moments over "why won't this bloody gadget work?!" and at the end of a day a bit of lull as we slump down after feasting in front of some Christmas telly. I think we're all so concerned about pleasing others at this time, which is wonderful of course, but we do need to think of ourselves too.
I feel especially anxious around Christmas time, its a time I associated with having to 'perform' and make an effort to seem happy when I'm really not. I truly wish I could flick the switch and just be able to enjoy the moment, but then again if I had said switch there really wouldn't be any problems at all. So, lets be realistic, there isn't a switch for Christmas except for the warming glow of the Christmas lights. My message to you all this Christmas is to be kind to others obviously, its not just about the presents, Christmas is a feeling. It's a feeling which ought to have all year-round, we don't always know whats really going on with those around us. The other day I was told about a statistic that 1 in 10 women in the UK are on anti-depressants. Look around you, look at the women in your family and friends, they could well be struggling too. Perhaps we'll never know who those people are, but just remember when you're out struggling against the Christmas shoppers, feeling flustered and panicky (this was me yesterday) amongst those crowds will be someone just like you. So a little bit of kindness, asking how the cashier's day is going, pleases and thank yous may well brighten their day.

But we also need to remember to bring the kindness closer to home. Be kind to YOURSELF. If it all gets too crowded and noisy at Christmas, excuse yourself for a while, go off and pretend to inspect your presents a bit closer, go in search of the batteries needed for THAT present (theres always one) or claim to have a dodgy tum due to the sprouts. Take some time out, slump down on a bed or a sofa, have that infamous Christmas nap with the Christmas cracker crown askew on your head. Just take some time out, we all get a bit stressed out on the big day and do our best to hide it only to have a mini outburst at the roast potatoes or a loved one. We all just need to take some time for ourselves, get some fresh air, and reconvene to get our butts kicked by the adults at trivial pursuit.

In the meantime, if you are still struggling for a gift for someone (or fancy a cheeky something for yourself) take a look at the photos for a wonderful treat. These little boxes are designed in mind of you, simply fill out your details and they will cater a surprise box of goodies for you every month centred around different themes. I've had two so far and they have been marvellous, a lovely little pick-me-up of treats you'd never think to go out and buy, each box is worth over £65 but you only pay £11 a month. You can start and cancel any time. You can also buy a 3 month, 6 month or a year's subscription for a friend. As I said before, you may never know who else is experiencing the same things as you. If you've noticed a friend has been missing out on the action recently, not seeming like themselves or has definitely been having a difficult time treating them to this little box of magic is sure to put a smile on their face, it won't work miracles but that friend is sure to remember that kindness for years to come. Check out My Little Box's website here to check out all the details and even see some of their previous boxes.