As I write this I've just crawled out from beneath my duvet after having a particularly rough day. Technically I haven't seen any of the day to know that it was been rough. For once it isn't depression related. Everyone in the house that realises I've been absent for a day assumes that I'm beating myself up in my head. Today was simply feeling like I had the flu, feeling trampled and having only been tired enough to fall asleep at 7am.

Anyway, today's post isn't about that. This week was the start of FitBit's 'Big Billion Stepathon' for Sports Relief. I don't need to tell you what a fantastic cause it is. FitBit's idea is that for every 20,000 steps each person completes they will donate £1 to Sport Relief. The daily recommended steps for a person to be fit and healthy is 10,000 per day. Should be pretty easy to start raking in the money through doing something we do every day, right? The answer is yes for most people. For people such as myself it might be slightly more difficult. It's not that we are lazy, or don't care. I'll actually be pushing myself harder than normal in attempts to do my bit for the Stepathon! Feeling too low to get up and out of bed? Put on your FitBit and jiggle those legs around in bed, do the warm bed dance! Going out to walk the dog anyway? Give the little fella or lady a treat by stomping around a bit further than normal. Need a few bits from the shop? Don't go out in the car, make use of the local corner shop- getting the steps in AND supporting a local business at the same time, RESULT! Still in your pyjamas, working from home, feeling low or under the weather? Head to the kitchen, put the radio on, switch on the kettle for a lovely warming brew and whilst you wait DANCE IT OUT. Dancing isn't a cure I must say, but dancing like a loon free of all inhibitions is pretty damn satisfying.


The Stepathon is running until the 31st of March, so get moving! Check out the website here for all of the details. If you don't already own a FitBit, they are knocking off some money on all some of their products purchased during the Stepathon! I really recommend them. You don't necessarily need a super flash one. I own the 'Zip' as pictured above. It's easy to set up, can be clipped onto your bra strap, the waistband of your jeans or whatever and can be linked via Bluetooth to an app on your phone which shows you how many steps you're achieving throughout the day! So go on, give it a go! I'd love to hear how many steps you achieve!


Follow