 Picture an elderly person using a zimmer-frame or someone with their leg in plaster using crutches. No decent person would pull the zimmer away or kick the crutches out from underneath them. Physical injuries are usually apparent when we see someone using an aid to keep them upright, to support them during recovery. No-one can force someone to put their injured foot down to the ground, put pressure on the wound and shuffle into the first steps. The first steps of recovery require being mentally prepared, admitting to yourself that you are ready to venture out into the next stage of your recovery timeline.

In my previous post I mentioned how I'm sometimes afraid of using my depression as a crutch. After the post went live I had a few questions asked in relation to that comment.  I'd never claim to have depression if I didn't. I wouldn't over-exaggerate how bad things are in attempts to get out of doing things. I believe that my illness has become a crutch due to having it for so long. I've lived with varying degrees of depression for six years, this has lead to me living in a certain way, perhaps being shielded from certain aspects of life which could cause a great deal of anxiety and do more damage. After living my late teenage years and early adult life with this illness it seems as if its all I know, life without it is equally as terrifying as continuing to be depressed for several more years. Of course I'd like to live a happy life free of depression, and I hope this will be the case one day. But perhaps my anxiety about being free of depression, free of the crutches is a sign that I'm still not quite there yet, and that's OK. If the crutches are kicked away from you by someone pushing you too hard to make progress faster than your own pace don't be too disheartened. These people usually have good intentions, but it can cause a hitch in your progress towards recovering. So, take a breather if you get knocked and hopefully someone will be there to help you up again until you're ready to walk on your own again.