My response to an article in The Times 'Schools calling in therapists as stress soars among pupils'. 

Last week an article written in The Times was brought to my attention, the subject being that of mental health issues in children and young adults. Our generation has seen an increase in the amount of pressure placed on us whilst we are in the education system, even more so now as young adults must go on to sixth form education and in the face of exam systems changing and becoming harder. As the pressure to achieve high grades increases, students are becoming more stressed. Where does this stress go and where do students go for help? In the aforementioned article it is stated that 'top schools' are seeking help for their students through professional psychiatrists, including Priory group clinics, a privately based group of psychiatrists of whom I have sought help from in the past. The article solely focuses on private/public schools as opposed to state schools, they say that there is an increased amount of anxiety present in children facing entrance tests to elite preparatory schools. Perhaps such institutions ought to address the problem at the source, placing such an amount of pressure on such young children isn't the best thing for their health, and could impact their ability to learn later on. I certainly wasn't seen as an academic during my time at secondary school, I wasn't at the top of my classes, I flew under the radar but I certainly felt the pressure of having to achieve high grades. This pressure wasn't due to me having high expectations, nor was it my parents breathing down my neck due to a fear of me not going on to further education. It was the school itself, they weren't intentionally creating a stressful environment for their students. However, state schools, just like public schools, face an increased pressure to achieve a certain standard indicated by OFSTED reports, they're either aiming to maintain a certain level or even rise from a poor report. This determination tends to have a negative affect upon the students, teachers want to be seen to be creating model students with high grades, or risk facing criticism for their quality of teaching. 

The article refers to how some public schools are seeking the help of professionals to help with students experiencing stress related problems and high levels of anxiety. Its understandable that a school would want to seek the help of the very best for their students, but paying for private help isn't possible within all schools. The state school I attended didn't even have enough funding for an in-school counsellor. Even if this service was available within a school, would children take advantage of it? My biggest issue with using a counselling service (later in sixth form) was the fear of being seen near the counsellor's office in a very public, busy part of the sixth form. Some children may deter seeking help due to fear of stigma, which unfortunately is present within schools. I believe that the use of psychiatrists by private schools might not be in the best interests of the students. Perhaps these schools are actually attempting to protect their backs, attempting to maintain their 'top school' status through producing Oxbridge students. Private help certainly is not the only answer, in fact my experience with private assistance was not the best, everyone's experience is different and I'm open to other opinions, however I believe they did more harm to my mental health than good. 

I am of course very happy to see more media coverage on mental health issues, particularly coverage of mental health care of young people. However, it ought to be addressed across all areas of education. I know that as a broadsheet newspaper The Times is generally considered to be a 'middle class' publication and so it is more likely for them to cover these issues in a way that address their target market. The Times have implemented a campaign for training teachers to help identify at risk children within schools, something which I wholeheartedly support. There ought to be room in schools' budgets to accommodate the mental health needs of their students. I certainly wish there had been a counsellor available in a secure, and discrete location within my school, perhaps I would have been able to prevent my problems from spanning across my years within higher education. Mental health specialists certainly should not be forced upon children. If teachers can receive training to identify at risk children they ought to only act when they are 100% certain and perhaps when the parents of the minor have been contacted. Singling out a child in the wrong way could do more damage, particularly if they haven't yet established what is wrong with them for themselves, or if the teacher is wrong about their suspicions. As is said before, help should not be forced upon them as this could create a negative association or a trigger for the child involved. I believe that mental health education ought to be taught within schools as part of their PSHE lessons (personal, social and health education) and certainly not breezed over as a topic covered quickly. 