Not the best of photos, but a rare good day was captured on an especially bouncy tree!


I may only be 21 years old but I've come to the point in my life where I need a mid-life breather. I've already had to deal with some very testing moments and some dark struggles. Unfortunately for the past 6 or more years I've been in pretty poor physical health, my immune system has been shot to pieces and I've also been experiencing mental health issues. I will go on to write more about my mental health in future blog posts as the primary focus of my blog is to address conditions such as social anxiety, panic attacks and depression, all of which I have and still experience daily.
I'm not expecting a huge following of this blog, if I could help just one person feeling a bit lost, struggling with the pressures of daily life in our hectic modern world, I'd be ecstatic. I think this is what was missing when I was a young girl struggling each day feeling incredibly low without knowing why, I'd see other people my age having the time of their lives, living without fear, living in the moment and having fun before heading off to university and the workplace. I just didn't understand what was happening to me and why I was different. One thing I've learnt so far in my (slow) recovery and acceptance of my mental illness, is that difference is brilliant, no two people are exactly the same. We all have different qualities, and we search for people with the qualities we lack in ourselves. Depression has next to no perks as such, but having lived through some incredibly dark days, feeling pretty crap and hopeless means that any good day and good experiences I have will be appreciated so much more now; the contrast between the horrific and the good is great. Obviously I'd love to help anyone, especially any young people living with mental illness with this blog, but its also an attempt to save myself, to give me something to be held accountable for, to get up for and to occupy some of the time in my belated gap year.


<a href="http://www.bloglovin.com/blog/12749827/?claim=w493v9vtz2y">Follow my blog with Bloglovin</a>