I usually remain quiet about social movements that pop up in the media as I don't want to push my views down people's throats. Everyone is entitled to their own opinion, and we are fortunate enough to live in a society where we can air out our opinions without the risk of capital punishments. I am so glad that I'm part of a generation that IS the change we've wanted to see for some time. Our actions and our voices can be used for the greater good. I was incredibly happy, albeit quietly so, about the US passing the bill for gay marriage across all of the American states. In my eyes, love is love, and no-one should get in the way of that. As you will know I also believe that illness is illness, in whatever form it comes in it deserves compassion, sensitivity and sympathy.

Over the past few weeks I've noticed the emergence of the 'semi-colon movment'. A social movement surrounding grammar? Not so much. The semicolon ';' is used in a sentence when the writer could have ended something but instead chose to continue; a time to pause but not the end. This is a definition that is poignant to myself and so many others. The semicolon movement is based around this definition and the idea that people mark themselves with the symbol. This permanent or semi-permanent marking shows others that they have either experienced depression, know someone who has/had depression or even as a dedication to those who were killed by this illness. I've seen a variety of coverage on the movement from news articles to comments posted on social media. Some people believe that it's nonsensical, that these tattoos will become this generation's equivalent to the tramp stamp. I can understand how some people would think it's a bit much to permanently mark yourself with a grammatical tool. However, when they've been informed of the strong meaning behind it I wish they'd keep quiet. Others had mistakenly believed that it was simply a hype or fashion trend, only to realise it's true meaning and hop aboard the support wagon. I'd like to believe that even if I hadn't got a tattoo, I wouldn't be so quick to judge someone by their physical appearance, even by the type of body art they choose for themselves. We don't always know what others have been through, or what they may currently be experiencing. We all need to give and receive more kindness in this world.

I don't believe that this movement is just a phase. I certainly hope that those taking part have really understood it's intention and that they haven't gone out and got a tattoo on a whim. PLEASE do not go out and recklessly get a tattoo, think about it seriously, mull it over for a long period of time, if it's something you really want it won't hurt to wait a few more weeks to be 100% sure. Do your research about the tattoo artists around you, or even look at those further afield to make sure you have a good experience with the right artist for you. Ensure that all the equipment is new for each customer and that the environment is sterile. I could do an entire post on my experiences of being tattooed, there is A LOT to cover, so please let me know if you'd like to see a post on that subject.

Some people have been slamming the movement because they saw it pop up a few years back. Why criticise it for re-emerging? I for one am glad it's come up again, it's a sign of progress. It's a sign of understanding the effects and devastation that mental illness can cause. I'm delighted to see Instagram, Pinterest and Facebook being bombarded with photos of people with the semicolon tattoo, either as a standalone symbol or it being incorporated into a more personal design. It's not a fad, it's not about hopping aboard a popular craze. If someone in a bad way notices someone with this tattoo it could help them, albeit in a small way. Just seeing that on the streets, next to you in the uni library, passing you your cup of coffee, it can assure you that you are not alone. Others have been and will be affected by this illness at some point in their lives, either you directly or a loved one could experience depression in your lifetime. It doesn't have to spark a conversation, it would be fantastic if it did, but just seeing it could provide some much needed comfort during a low point. I'm certainly not instructing anyone to go out and get inked. Perhaps donate to a local or national mental health charity, show your support by inking yourself with a Sharpie pen and sharing it on social media and wear it out to see if anyone notices. After much consideration I've decided to get my own permanent sign of support (sorry mum and dad!). For me it's also a reminder that my story could have ended, it very nearly did; I'm still here and I'm not finished yet.