The official date of my blog birthday is the 14th of October, so this would have been an ideal post for last week as it fell on a Wednesday (my normal blogging day). As I previously mentioned on the Cheerful Chelsea Facebook page, I recently had an operation on my nose (not a nose job thanks) and I decided to extend my blogging vacation. Fear not! I have not abandoned the blog, I just felt like I was beginning to repeat myself. Even though I'm often sharing my personal history and experiences with you, it can take me a while when writing about certain events and topics. This is usually due to me suppressing things over the years so I'm slowly uncovering details and rediscovering memories. Fortunately for others out there, I am in a better place to deal with things now so hopefully my words will provide some relief if you've been through similar experiences.

Anyway, it's been one year since I started the blog! I just wanted to take the time to say thank you to everyone that has supported me this year and has read any of my blog posts. Due to the nature of this blog I understand that most readers might not be in the position where they feel comfortable to comment. I felt the same a few years ago, I was worried about certain people seeing me 'like' and comment on things to do with mental health. Despite not getting many comments, I am still in awe of how many views I receive! So thank you very much for listening (?) to me all year long.

It may not come as a surprise that I have been worrying about how long I will be able to continue writing in this way. Will it only last for as a long as I have depression? Will my readership start to fall as it begins to look like I've covered everything? Of course there is SO much to cover on mental health, and I only cover a small percentage of that as I can only write about what I've experienced. Writing has been so beneficial to my recovery as it has allowed me to fill the void left from not seeing a counsellor anymore. I didn't have the best experience with counsellors, I went through six different counsellors and decided that was enough. I'm not saying that anyone should forgo seeing a counsellor, it is definitely something that should be tried. All illnesses have a variety of treatments to alleviate the symptoms, one size does not fit all when it comes to the treatment of depression, and the same applies to so many other medical conditions. I may return to counselling one day, but for now being able to write allows me to work through my problems and process them in a way I never did in the past.

As for the future of the blog. Who knows. I definitely want to and WILL continue to write here. Perhaps Cheerful Chelsea will become a less ironic blog name over time! In the way that life evolves I'm sure the blog will develop too and it will be a way to document the time-line of my life. There might (probably will) be happier times to come, such as Robbie and I choosing to get married some day in the future. Hopefully posts on those kinds of developments in my life will encourage others to hope and believe that there will be an end to their depression. After-all, storms can't last forever.