Cindy.  That is me.

Who am I in this world?

There was a time in my life that if I were to be asked who I was, I would have said, "I am Cindy," but in my head I would have thought, "and I am nothing."

At that time, I thought that I was nothing.  I was deeply depressed, I hated myself, and the only things that I could think about myself were negative things.  I isolated myself and thought that I had no influence on the world around me, or if I did have an influence it was negative.  I was diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder at that time.

Time has moved on, and I have been out of my depression for a long time now.  I now know that I am definitely something.  Definitely someone.  God has shown me that.  But who is that someone?  Am I just someone with a mental illness, or is there more to me than that?

I decided to sit down and write out a list of as many aspects of myself as I could think of.  They are not feelings I have, nor are they descriptive words about me or my personality, nor are they view others have about me.  They are just statements of fact, "I am a/an _______."  So here it goes.

Who is Cindy?

I am:
a believer in Jesus
a follower of Jesus
a woman
a wife
a daughter 
a sister
an aunt
a granddaughter 
a niece 
a friend
a neighbor
a church member
a greeter
an American
a person with Dutch heritage 
a reader
a researcher
a writer
a blogger
a story teller
a music lover
a pianist 
an artist
a Bible college graduate
a world traveler
a Jerusalem pilgrim
a cat owner
an animal lover
a former missionary
a volunteer
a vice president 
a mentor
a listener
a speaker
a group facilitator
a teacher 
a bird watcher
a fisher woman 
a driver
a hockey fan
a swimmer
a cyclist
a hiker
a phlebotomist 
a medical lab tech assistant 
a person with bipolar disorder
a person who has overcome
a mental health advocate
a trained Certified Peer Counselor
a person who prays
a reader of God's Word
an ambassador 
a distributor of God's Word
a witness for Jesus Christ
a person who loves
a person who lives
I am me.
I am Cindy

Hi.

Who are you?  

You are not nothing.  You are something.

You can try this exercise too.  Write a list of as many aspects of yourself that you can think of.  These aspects are not feelings you have, nor are they descriptive words about you or your personality, nor are they view others have about you.  Remember just statements of fact, "I am a/an _______."

Examples:

I am:
a (your spiritual self)
a (your sex)
a (relation to people in your family)
a (your culture)
a (your actives)
a (your hobbies)
a (your job)
a (member of ____ )
etc...
Stop and do this now if you have the time.  Then read on...

Did you finish your list?

Who are you?

How do you relate to the world?

What is your unique combination of who you are?

How can you use this list to find ways to be involved with the world around you?

What is the most important thing on your list?

Seeing my own list shows me that I am not "just" my job or "just" my mental illness.  I am so much more.  I have so many things I can tell people when I am introduced to them for the first time.  I don't have to say "what I do" or how the world may want to define me.  I could say, "I am a story teller".  Then we could share stories.  How much fun that could be!  Or, I could say, "I am a listener," and ask them questions about who they are.  There are so many options, fun and serious.

One way that I will use my list is to think about the people that care about me and those that I care about.  People in my family that care about me as well as friends and people in my church for example.  My life is important to them.  When I get down, I can use this as an encouragement to keep on going in life.

Another way to use this list it to think of ways that I can get involved and connect with other people.  Is there a book group I could join, a writing class that I could take, a neighbor that I could invite to go on a bike ride with me?  Rather than isolate myself in the house, I can think of ways to get involved.

The top thing on my list is that I am a believer in Jesus Christ.  This is the single most important aspect of who I am.  I want each of the people that I connect with to see this and to want to know Jesus also.  I want them to be able to put that on the top of their list too.

One aspect of me on my list is that I am a writer and blogger.  I am a reader of God's Word,  I am a person who prays.  I am connecting with you now.  I am praying that you will find a Bible and read.  I am praying for you to come to know Jesus and be saved.  I am praying that being a believer in Jesus will be the first thing you want on your list as well.
For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. - John 3:16
Who are you?  You are many things.  You are someone loved by God.  You are offered eternal life because of God's Son.  Do you believe?

Would you like to add "believer in Christ" to your list?