I want to share this message of thanks that just I wrote to the first doctor that I saw when I became very depressed.  He prescribed medication to me that helped clear my mind enough that I could think clearly enough to be able to work through the things that contributed to the "bad" feelings that I felt in my life which caused me to want to and even try to end my own life.  If you are going through these things, please know that It is okay to get help.


Dear Dr. Greg  ______,
I don't know if you remember me or not.  I have gotten married since I was your patient from 20__ - 20__ or so, so my name has changed.  You were my doctor when I was very depressed, cutting myself, and extremely suicidal.  The counselor at my church who reached out to me at that time was the one who originally got me set up with you.  I was in a dark depression after coming back from being a missionary in Kenya.

Anyway, I know I have thanked you before for all you did for me during that time to help keep me alive, and I thank you again, because God has brought me through that darkness now and given me joy and blessings beyond belief.  He has shown me his great love for me, a love that was strong even when I was in the pit of despair.  He has even blessed me with a kind, gentle, loving, understanding, and Godly husband.  We have now been married one year, and we love each other more and more every day!  God has given me life again!  (I cry every time I say this because it is so unbelievable to me still that God would do this for me.  I was dead, and He now has become my very life.  I entrust it to him.)

I am just sending you this message to share these things with you and to give you the link to my blog.  I am sharing very openly about what I have been through and many of the things that God has taught me.  It is amazing and humbling to see how God is using my story now to encourage others who are going through similar struggles.  I pray that God will use me even more for his glory.

Feel free to read and share my story with anyone you feel may benefit from reading it.  I believe these struggles, even among Christians, need to be talked about more openly so that, even as followers of Jesus, we can know that we are not alone in our feelings of sadness, confusion, and hopelessness, and that it is ok to seek help and turn to Christ.

Thank you again for how you helped me for so many years and for your efforts to make the symptoms, causes, and treatment of depression more well know.

Thank you for being a part of my story.

In Christ,

~Cynthia M. Wolf