Somehow I managed to get out of giving a single speech in the entirety of my high school career.  I'm not quite sure how I managed it.  Maybe the fact that I went to three different schools or that I never volunteered and then we ran out of time was a factor.  So then, when it came to then end of my senior year, and I was to graduate as Valedictorian with a 4.0 GPA,  I was faced with the task of writing and giving my first speech in front of my entire graduating class and all those who came to watch and cheer us on.  What I came up with is not too long, but holds some truths in it for us even today in what ever changes are coming up in our lives.  Here it is:

To Graduate - What does it mean?  According to Webster's dictionary, to graduate is to pass from one stage of experience, proficiency, or prestige to a higher one.
Graduation.  We have made it through this stage in life.  We have had many experiences, some good and some bad.  We have learned many valuable lessons that will stay with us the rest of our lives.  Now it is time for us to pass on to an even higher stage in life.  Excitement!  It is hard to believe that this is real!  But what will the next stage be like?  Behind all of our excitement of graduating there hides some fear.  Our minds are filled with high hopes, expectations, fears, and doubts all at once.  We wonder if we should get a job, go to college, or get married.  Can we make it away from our friends and family?  What if we don't succeed?  These are scary thoughts, but they can't be ignored.  The way we choose to respond will affect our future.  I believe there are three ways we could choose to respond:

We can dwell on the past.  When hard times come our way we could focus all our attention on how life used to be and how happy we used to be, and get ourselves so upset that things have changed that we just want to quit.  That doesn't work!  Let's remember, learn from, and treasure the past, but not forget the present.
Another way we can respond to the unknowns of this new stage in life is to just live for the present.  Some people say, "If it feels good at the moment, do it".  Or, "Let me live my own life.  It doesn't affect anyone else".  Please don't fall into this trap!  Sure drinking, drugs, and other things may feel good at the time, but your feelings will change if you contract a disease or if someone close is killed because of drinking and driving.  We can't live for the moment.  
We must look to the future.  Our lives do affect others, especially those within our families.  The choices we make now will determine the kind of heritage we pass on to future generations.  What heritage will we leave?
Can you imagine if every one of us got married and had two kids, then they got married and did the same and so on, that by the time we have grandchildren around one thousand people would be affected by our small class.  We are going to make a difference in the world whether we like it or not.  Let's decide now to make every little decision today count for the future so that others that come after us will be proud of the heritage we have left them.
I thank God for giving me a rich heritage in which He is number one, and with His help I will carry that heritage on.
The challenge I leave with you is;  If you have a rich heritage keep it going, and if not start one today with every decision you make.  With God's help we can make a better tomorrow.  We are the future, let's live like it today!