This is the "Should List" that I wrote down on a sheet of notebook paper in the very midst of my depression (in 2004 I believe).  I was trying to go by this list in my life as a Christian in order to live well, but it was really killing me.


The Should List
I should:
be a better Christian
read my Bible every day
pray every day
feel a connection with God
have joy in worship
not question God
not doubt God
go to church every week
be a missionary
live every moment to the best of my ability
be making a difference for eternity
be happy always
be thankful always
be a leader
trust God through all circumstances
talk openly about what God is doing in my life
always be trying to be more like Christ
be helping people
be doing something important
be strong on my own
get excited when others do missions
be involved in a Bible study
have Christian friends
apply the Bible to my life
not be jealous of other people
not judge other people
eat healthy food
exercise almost every day
have close relationships with my family and friends
be in a relationship
do everything perfectly
want to live 
not want to die

I believed that I should be doing all these things in order to be a "good Christian."  Somehow I thought that this would make God happier with me and that I would be happier myself and more at peace if I could do all of these things perfectly.  The problem was that I knew that I couldn't do all the "shoulds".  Even if other people looked at me and thought that I was doing a good job, I knew in my heart that I wasn't doing them (and don't tell, but I didn't even always want to do them).  Therefore, I knew that I was a "bad Christian."  I was a fake.  I was a failure to myself and to God.  I could not be happy.  I could not feel peace as a Christian, even though I "should."

I knew that the blood of Jesus covered my sins, but it took me a long time to realize that Jesus' blood had covered even my inability to do the "shoulds".  He knew the true me.  He knew I couldn't do it.  

Jesus was saying to me, "I'll do it.  I have done it all for you on the cross.  I love you as you are.  You don't need to "should" on yourself.  When God looks at you, He sees Me in my perfection and is satisfied."  

Wow, what a relief that was!  God loved even the messy me, the me that was always falling short.  I could finally be OK with myself because God was OK with me.  I could be free from all the guilt and shame and striving and just rest in Him.  I no longer had to worry about the "shoulds" because God was the one who would work in me to make me the beautiful person He wanted me to be.  He became my peace and rest and the source of a quiet happiness that continues on.


Thank you Jesus.

                                          ~Cindy