[The following prayer update was written by me from Africa about a week and a half after arriving there.  I am including these writings from Kenya in my blog because they tell a part of my story I want to remember.  So, more will be coming.  You can relive the story with me as I discover the things I did and went through in Africa and my thoughts along the way.]

Tuesday, September 5, 2000

Dear Friends and Family,

So much has happened since I have arrived in Kenya that I can hardly remember when the last time I wrote to you was.  Many of you must be wondering how I am doing and how things are for me here so I will take this opportunity while I am still in Nairobi (the capital city) to give you an update.

Thank you for praying for me.  I believe that God is really using your prayers.  The stomach trouble that I had when I arrived quickly went away and has not returned.  I am very thankful for that.  I have been kept safe in travel, some of which has been very crazy, especially when riding a matatu (a type of large van or small bus that is stuffed full of bodies and bumps along at a very fast pace).  I thank God for the warm welcome of the local African Christian family that I will be staying with and of the community.  I also am very thankful for the way God arranged things so that I could go out for a few days to my location before returning to Nairobi for a time of orientation with other new missionary teachers.  This has allowed me to see and experience where I will be, and then come back to the city and be able to better prepare mentally, physically, and emotionally for it.  I really am going to need to completely depend on God for everything.

Let me give you a semi-brief description of where I will be living as of tomorrow:  My small house is made out of red brick with a tin roof set on top.  The floor is cement, and I have wooden shutters, but no glass on the windows.  I have a main room, two small bedrooms, and a store room.  I don't have electricity or a phone, but I do have a kerosene lamp.  The family kitchen is a separate mud hut with a grass roof.  In it food is cooked on three stones over an open fire.  I bathe out of a small bowl with a few gallons of water, and the toilet is long drop (a hole in the ground a stone's throw from the house).  Clothes are washed by hand in small tubs and hung on lines to dry.

The location is beautifully set in the mountains and hills of Eastern Kenya (Nzoui, I believe).  I can climb up to a high rock and see out over the whole area.  The shambas (farms) are spread out within walking distance of each other, with the church set on the most fertile land next to the largest sycamore tree.  The primary school where I will be teaching is just past the church and up the hill.  

Much of Kenya is experiencing drought, and my location is especially dry.  Even the oranges have dried up on the trees, and other supplies are short.  Cows are very thin, and smaller animals such as chickens are dying from lack of food and water.  Many people do not even know where they will get the tea leaves or sugar (the price of which has tripled within two weeks and is very scarce) for their  next cup of tea, but are just trusting God day by day to provide.  Please pray for the water and food situations here.  Rain is really needed.

I have been to the school and seen some of the children.  They have so little to work with and yet work so hard.  They mostly speak their tribal language, Kikamba, so please pray for me as I try to communicate with them in English, and as I learn and try to understand Kikamba.

I have been asked to speak in church next Sunday, and I have already had a few chances to share devotionals from God's Word.  Please pray that God would speak through me as I take these opportunities that He gives me to share His Word.  I feel so inadequate, and yet thank God for the chance to be used by Him.  In this whole experience, I feel like a small child.  I am having to learn everything in a whole new way.  Even things such as eating, bathing, and speaking have to be taught to me.  I am finding myself many evenings on my knees telling God that I don't know how to do this and crying out, "Help me, Lord".  I thank God for this chance to get to know Him in a whole new and closer way, and I only pray that each of you will have the same opportunity to daily depend on Him.  God is so good.

I travel back to Muthyoi with all my stuff by matatu tomorrow, and then will start my first day as a teacher on Thursday, so your prayers in these next few days will be invaluable.

Keep loving Jesus.
Sincerely in Christ,

~Cindy