The following  are some poems and quotes that touched my heart from Brent Curtis in "Less-Wild Lovers," which I had written in a journal entry during my senior year of college:


"Batter my heart three personed God; for you
As yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend.
That I may rise and stand, o'erthrow me and bend
Your force, to break, blow, burn, and make me new,
I like an usurped town, to another due,
Labor to admit you, but, oh to no end;
Reason, your viceroy in me, me should defend;
But is captive and proves weak or untrue.

Yet dearly I love you and would be loved fain;
But am betrothed unto your enemy;
Divorce me, untie or break that knot again,
Take me to you, imprison me, for I,
Except you enthrall me, never shall be free,
Nor ever chaste, except you ravish me."

- Brent Curtis, "Less-Wild Lovers"


...sentences left by one former traveler,
"Don't be afraid of embracing the disappointment you feel, old or new.  Don't be scared of the unreachable joy either.  They're the highway markers home.  I've gone on ahead.
Your Truly."

-Brent Curtis, "Less-Wild Lovers"


"There comes a place on our spiritual journey where renewed religious activity is of no use whatsoever.  It is the place where God holds out his hand and asks us to give up our lovers and come and live with him in a much more personal way...We are both drawn to it and fear it.
The desire God has placed within us is wild in it's longing to pursue the One who is unknown.  Its capacity and drive is so powerful that it can only be captured momentarily in moments of deep soul communion or sexual ecstasy.  And when the moment has passed, we can only hold it as an ache, a haunting of quicksilver that flashes a remembrance of innocence known and lost, and if we have begun to pass into the life of the Beloved, a hope of ecstasies yet to come.
To hope in the kind of goodness that would set our heart free, we must be willing to allow our desire to remain haunted."

-Brent Curtis, "Less-Wild Lovers"


Something to ponder.
~Cindy

Link to Brent Curtis's, "Less-Wild Lovers"