A few questions for you:

Do you ever feel like your very soul is hurting and confused?
Are your enemies all around putting pressure on you to do what is wrong or trying to drag you down?
Do you wonder about the path you should take?
And, "what is truth?" you may wonder.
Do you feel that your sins have piled up on you, that you can't get out from under them, and that you just hate who you have become?
Do you imagine that God hates you too, that he will hold each little sin against you even if you were to repent and come to him?
Where do you look for help?
To who do you look when you are trapped?
Are you lonely?
Who do you go to when there is no one to go to?
What can you do when your troubles and pain and heartache are too great to handle?
Is there a place to hide and be safe; a place protecting your life from others, from the world, and from yourself?
Is there hope?

An answer for you:

The following is from the Bible, written by King David of Israel over three thousand years ago when he was in a time of great distress.  These truths have applied to my life.  They answer all the questions above for you too.  (The underlines are mine.)

Of David [The king of Israel .]

"To you, O LORD, I lift up my soul; in you I trust, O my God. Do not let me be put to shame, nor let my enemies triumph over me.  No one whose hope is in you will ever be put to shame, but they will be put to shame who are treacherous without excuse.  Show me your ways, O LORD, teach me your paths; guide me in your truth and teach me, for you are God my Savior, and my hope is in you all day long.  Remember, O LORD, your great mercy and love, for they are from of old.  Remember not the sins of my youth and my rebellious ways; according to your love remember me, for you are good, O LORD.  Good and upright is the LORD; therefore he instructs sinners in his ways.  He guides the humble in what is right and teaches them his way.  All the ways of the LORD are loving and faithful for those who keep the demands of his covenant.  For the sake of your name, O LORD, forgive my iniquity, though it is great.  Who, then, is the man that fears the LORD? He will instruct him in the way chosen for him.  He will spend his days in prosperity, and his descendants will inherit the land.  The LORD confides in those who fear him; he makes his covenant known to them.  My eyes are ever on the LORD, for only he will release my feet from the snare.  Turn to me and be gracious to me, for I am lonely and afflicted.  The troubles of my heart have multiplied; free me from my anguish.  Look upon my affliction and my distress and take away all my sins.  See how my enemies have increased and how fiercely they hate me!  Guard my life and rescue me; let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in you.  May integrity and uprightness protect me, because my hope is in you."
~Psalm 25:1-21 (NIV)



......and my reply to God is:

"Yes Lord, guard my life and rescue me... even from myself. My only hope is in you. Thank you Jesus for you have done it.
AMEN and AMEN."
~Cindy