Have you ever wondered about your name?  Where it came from?  What it means?  Do you wonder if you reflect that meaning at all in who you are?  Well, I did.  I wondered, who was I?  Could my name tell me something special about my unique self?  Well, it turns out that the answer for me, Cynthia or Cindy, is yes.  So here it is:

Cynthia

Cynthia is a name of Greek origin: Κυνθία, Kynthía "from Mount Cynthus" on Delos Island.  Cynthia was originally an epithet, or a descriptive title, of the Greek goddess of the moon, Artemis, who was sometimes called "Cynthia" because, according to legend, the goddess was born on Mount Cynthus.

Cynthia has the meaning "goddess of the moon," or "the moon personified," and Cindy also carries with it the meaning "Bringer of Light."
The Moon

The moon is the natural satellite of Earth, and it is visible to us only by reflection of sunlight.  In the darkness is when the moon is mostly seen.  The moon is a beautiful thing in the night sky, but its beauty is not seen without the reflection of sunlight.


With my name, Cynthia, meaning "goddess of the moon," I like to think about how this meaning relates to me and who I am.  Though I am not a goddess, I know who the true God is, the true light that shines for us all.  In the Bible the Son of God, Jesus, is called the "true light."  John chapter 1, speaking of Jesus, says:
4 In him [Jesus] was life, and that life was the light of all mankind. 5 The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it...9 The true light that gives light to everyone was coming into the world. 10 He was in the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him...12 Yet to all who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God.
As it says in this passage, I have received Jesus.  I have believed in His Name, and I have become a child of God.  As Cynthia, "the moon," I am now reflecting the very source of true light.  In John chapter 8 it says:
12 When Jesus spoke again to the people, he said, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
I have decided to follow Jesus.  I have the "Light of life" shining forth from my life.  As I am still moving around this Earth in the dark of night, I pray that God is using me, Cynthia, as the moon, to reflect His light to the dark world.  And I pray that He is using me, Cindy, to be "the bringer of Light" to those around me who are still in the dark without hope.

So when you look at me, may you see my Savior, Jesus, the Light of the world.  Amen.
Yes, Amen

More of Cindy's Story Blog
If you are interested in knowing more about how the meaning of my name has worked out and is being worked out in my life, you can read more.

My Depression Story (a Christian Woman's Story of Cutting, Suicide Attempts, and Bipolar Disorder)
Here is a popular and important post to read to know more about darkness and light in my life.  This entry is the story of many years of struggle and how I was brought out of the deep, dark pit that I had fallen into.

Asante sana,
~Cindy