 The following is my testimony to becoming a Christian and God's work in my life as written by me in 1995 for my application to Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, of which I later attended and received my BA in International Ministries from.  Much has happened in the almost 20 years since this was written to add to the testimony of my life with Jesus Christ, but these were some examples in my life at that time.
Testimony - 1995

I live in a committed Christian family and have seen God's love shine through my parents, grandparents, and great grandparents ever since I can remember.  Even though I was young, I knew that Jesus loved me and that he died for my sins so that I could go to heaven with him someday if I believed.
   At four years of age I asked Jesus into my heart.  Ever since that day, Jesus has been my best friend.  He has never left me, even when I was ignoring him.  I have found Jesus to be a friend that will listen to me when no one else will.  He understands my troubles and comforts me in a way no one else can.  When I go my own way, I find that he always brings me back to himself.  I am so thankful.  Our God is an awesome God!

The summer before my Sophomore year in high school, after my family had lived in our newly built house but a month, a great forest fire came through the forest surrounding our house.  We were sure that our house was burning, but as we watched the flames from afar, many people throughout the United States who knew us or were told of the fire, were playing to God for us.  Everyone who knew us or who knew any of our Christian neighbors prayed.

A few days later, upon returning to where we lived, we found that the fire had been stopped at the very edge of our property.  It was like angels were standing on that line stopping the flames from reaching our house.  This situations showed me the power of people praying together and God answering in an amazingly obvious way.

Being a part of God's family has brought me the most joy and the most sadness.  Joy because I know that I have been saved from my sins and from eternity in hell, but sadness because I know that many people in this world will never accept the gift of life that Jesus offers them.  I remember the tears of joy that ran down my face the Sunday that I heard that a good friend of mine had accepted Jesus as his personal Savior!  Jesus had used my life as a witness to my friend, and now he would live forever in heaven!  I want everyone to be able to see the love of Jesus shining through my life every day so that they will have the chance to know of Jesus and accept him as well.


Now - June 2014

The testimony of my life and walk with Jesus Christ in, "This story that is my life," has continued to unfold and even now continues unfolding.  Through the joyful and hopeful experiences to the deepest, darkest pits.  From near death, to a life that is not my own, but sustained in Christ.  As sung in the hymn, "Rock of Ages, Cleft for Me," verses 3 and 1.  (Text: Augustus M. Toplady, 1740-1778, Music: Thomas Hastings, 1784-1872):

3.    Nothing in my hand I bring,
       simply to the cross I cling;
       naked, come to thee for dress;
       helpless, look to thee for grace;
       foul, I to the fountain fly;
       wash me, Savior, or I die.

1.    Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
       let me hide myself in thee;
       let the water and the blood,
       from thy wounded side which flowed,
       be of sin the double cure;
       save from wrath and make me pure.

Now, as I struggle and learn little things day by day, I am so shocked and amazed by the blessings that God has and is bestowing on me.  Things I never hoped or dreamed could ever come to me.  I deserve none of this that God has placed in my hands and heart and life.  Oh, how God is using the process of my journey to show my his astounding love to me and to others.  I hope you know it too.

~Cindy