Music, to me, can be the expression of my soul's cry, of my soul's need and desire, or of my soul's joy.  I would like to share some of those collections of songs with you.


Below, I have listed all the songs, and the times in my life when they were important to me.  
Here is the link as well to my youtube playlist of all these songs: 

Songs I Listened To During Times of Struggle and Then of Joy.  

During High School:
Back in the 1990s before playlists on our computers and phones that we can carry with us, I used to make mixed tapes of the songs I listened to the most.  These are the songs from the mixed cassette tape that I made.  I listened to it over and over during the many times when I was sad and depressed hoping to give myself some hope to hold on to.

Side 1
"With Me Anywhere" - Mark Farner
"Right Where You Are" - Kenny Marx
"I Know a Love" - Al Denson
"My Father's Chair" - David Meece
"When God Ran" - Benny Hester
"Without You" - Mark Farner
"Hold Me" - Benny Hester
"Hold Me Jesus" - Rich Mullins
"Nobody Knows Me Like You" - Benny Hester
"Brokenness" - David Meece
Side 2
"You Know and I Know" - Bebe and Cece Winans
"Holding Out Hope to You" - Michael English
"You're All I Need" - The Kry
"To Know You" - Versus
"I Will Be With You" - Denny Correll
"I Miss the Way" - Michael W. Smith
"It is Love" - Versus
"Jesus Loves Me"
"He Won't Let You Go" - The Kry
"Brokenness" - David Meece
During My College Years:
In California, Oregon, Illinois, and Northern Ireland, these songs were some meaningful ones to me.

California
"On My Own" - from Les Miserables
"Castle on a Cloud" - from Les Miserables
"All I Ask of You" - from The Phantom of the Opera
"Think of Me" - from The Phantom of the Opera
"Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again" - from The Phantom of the Opera
Oregon
"My Jesus I Love Thee" - Go Fish
"He'll Do Whatever It Takes" - Phillips, Craig, and Dean
Illinois
"Holy, Holy, Holy" - (A hymn I was practicing on the piano at the time)
"Oh Sacred Head" - (A hymn I was practicing on the piano at the time)
Northern Ireland
"Jesus, All For Jesus" - Robin Mark
"How Great are You Lord" - Robin Mark
"When It's All Said and Done" - Robin Mark
Illinois
"Thirsty" - Chris Rice
"Pour Out My Heart" - Vineyard Music
"Will You Love Jesus More" - Phillips, Craig, and Dean
While in Kenya:
During the first half of the year that I lived with a family in a village in Kenya, I did not have electricity or a means of listening to music, except when we sang hymns together in the Kenyan's tribal language.  During the second half of the year that I lived in Kenya I was given a battery powered CD player and cassette player to borrow .  I listened to the one CD that I bough and one mixed cassette tape that my sister sent me from the States.  These were the songs that were especially meaningful to me from that CD and cassette tape:
"Untitled Hymn (Come To Jesus)" - Chris Rice
"O Love That Will Not Let Me Go" - Chris Rice
"Put All Your Trust In Jesus Today" - Brooklyn Tabernacle Singers
"Jesus Will Make a Way" - Brooklyn Tabernacle Singers
"God is Able" - Brooklyn Tabernacle Singers
"Hiding Place" - Brooklyn Tabernacle Singers
"God is Gonna Finish Just What He Started" - Brooklyn Tabernacle Singers
At Home After Kenya:
I listened to these songs during my many years of time spent in the pit of depression after I came back to Oregon, USA from Kenya, Africa.

Depression:
"Prelude To A Kiss" - Alicia Keys
"Piano & I" - Alicia Keys
"Troubles" - Alicia Keys
"Why Do I Feel So Sad" - Alicia Keys
"The Worst Day Ever" - Simple Plan
"Perfect" - Simple Plan
"Untitled" - Simple Plan
"Welcome To My Life" - Simple Plan
"The Wreckage" - Vanessa Carlton
"This Time" - Vanessa Carlton
"Fix You" - Coldplay
"Bad Day" - Daniel Powter
"Go" - Boys Like Girls
"Ten Years Older" - Jarod Gorbel
"Ring The Bells" - Satellite
"Your Beating Heart" - Brendan James
"The Lonely" - Christina Perri
"Sad Song" - Christina Perri
Hope:
"I Cast All My Cares Upon You" (A chorus I liked to play on the piano and sing)
"Cry Out to Jesus"- Third Day
"I've Always Loved You" - Third Day
"Love Song" - Third Day
"Glory, Hallelujah (I've Got Nothing)" - Annie Bethancourt
"Maybe There's A Loving God" - Sara Groves
"You Cannot Lose My Love" - Sara Groves
"Less Like Scars" - Sara Groves
"Are You Afraid To Die" - Ricky Skaggs, Intro by Rev. Dr. Billy Graham
"Medley: I Need Thee Every Hour/Just As I Am" - Fernando Ortega
"If You Want Me To" - Ginny Owens
"Remember Me" - Ginny Owens & Mark Schultz
"Breathe" - Michael W. Smith
Having met my husband:
Songs that are our favorites and for each other:
" In Christ Alone / The Solid Rock" - Travis Cotrell
"Anything For You" - Brendan James
"Better Together" - Jack Johnson
"When God Made You" - Newsong
"Perfect For Me" - Ron Pope
"How Deep the Father's Love For Us" - Stuart Townsend
"Lord, I Need You" - Matt Maher
"Cornerstone" - Hillsong
Please share with me some of the songs that have been influential to you during years of depression or joy in your life.

~Cindy