(Read at her memorial, Dec. 7, 2007)



I love you Grandma...
for your spirit of adventure
for waterskiing and swimming with us at the lake
for taking me and my sister hiking and backpacking in the mountains with Grandpa
for going camping and staying at camp with us as Dad and Grandpa went hunting
for being a cool motorcycle grandma, riding with Grandpa in your red leather jacket

I love you Grandma...
for showing me that a girl can reach for the sky
for loving flowers and telling me all about them
for the way you like to take pictures of us kids and make us feel special

I love you Grandma...
for your open face grilled cheese sandwiches
for the homemade cookies you kept for us in the freezer
for your warm home baked blackberry pies made after our fingers turned purple from picking (and eating) the berries
for the way you whistled beautiful tunes twittering like a bird when you didn't even know you were doing it
for you beauty

I love you Grandma...
for working at the dentist's office so you were there for me when I was little and scared
for making going to the dentist fun as I grew up
for taking me shopping for a new outfit every year at Christmas when I was a little girl so we could be together (I felt so special)
for letting me pick out the clothes that were cool


I love you Grandma...
for loving and respecting Grandpa for over 50 years (You were so cute together)
for all the Sunday afternoons we spent with you as a family
for loving your family always and being best friends with your daughter as she was my mom
for loving Jesus and being an example for me of a Godly woman

I love you Grandma...
for letting me share your middle name, "Marie"
for loving me in all your special little ways
for saying, "I love you," and hugging me and kissing me on the cheek even when it was hard for you to remember who I was

I've missed you Grandma...
as I watched your personality gradually change with that horrible disease, Alzheimers
as you forgot who I was
as you forgot who Grandpa was
as you forgot who you were
as you slowly slipped away from us...

Now...I miss you Grandma...
as you have left us to be with Jesus, restored to your beautiful self
until you can give me that, "I love you," and hug and kiss on my cheek again

I love you forever.

Your oldest granddaughter,

Cynthia Marie