I am including the following as an entry in my blog for my own memory's sake.  I wrote the following two messages to my friends in Kenya who I had just lived with for an entire year.  This is about the moment I arrived home, back in the States.  I want to remember the joy I felt when I was surprised with the excitement and love from so many people welcoming me home.

---------------------------------------

Tuesday, July 31, 2001
In the USA

Bwana asifiwe!
Praise God!

God has brought me safely to the US.  I am now at the office in Pearl River, New York before heading the rest of the way home to Oregon.  My Kenyan clock says 2:50am, though the time here is 7:50pm only.  I only got about three or four hours of sleep total on both of my flights, which means I have had about four hours sleep in the last 40 hours.  S, I think that I will go sleep now, but I wanted you to know that I am safe, though I am already missing everyone in Kenya that I love and hold close to my heart.  I could not stop thinking of all of you that I left at the airport, and tears came to my eyes more than once.  I miss you already.  I thank God that He holds you in His hands.

All my love,
~Cindy

--------------------------------------

Friday, August 3, 2001
Oregon

I'm home!

Wow, it was so great arriving in Oregon last night after flying all day.  And what a surprise also awaited me!  When I got off the airplane in Portland where I was to have a three hour layover before flying the remaining short distance to my home near Redmond, there was my grandma holding flowers and ready to give me a big hug!  I was so surprised because I had not even told her when I was coming through.  She had also brought with her one of my aunts and a cousin, as well as the new wife of my youngest uncle who is my age.  I had never met her before.  They took me out for a nice meal, then I returned to the airport where I met my sister.  I missed her so much and we shard a few minutes together before I had to fly out again.  I will see her again tomorrow though so it was okay to only get a few moments together.

Upon flying the rest of the way, I got off the plane in Redmond and was greeted with hugs and flowers and a balloon from my parents, only then to realize that it was not just them.    They had brought a whole group of people who had all been praying for me over that past year I spent in Kenya, to greet me at the airport.  One guy was even taping the event with his video camera!  My arms were full of flowers and hugs and my heart full of smiles.  God is so good to me to have given me such wonderful and caring people in my life and to have kept me safely up to this point where I can join with those people that I love again.  So, thank you for your prayers.  Keep in touch.  As you can see, I hope to still be very present in your life, if not in person , then in words.  I miss you all.  Seeing these people that I love cannot help but remind me even of the people that I love that I had to leave behind for now.  You are in my prayers.

God bless and keep you.
~Cindy

-----------------------------------

p.s.  Thank you to everyone mentioned above.  I still remember your love and prayers for me.