[The following prayer update was written by me from Africa about a month after arriving there.  I am including these writings from Kenya in my blog because they tell a part of my story I want to remember.  You can relive the story with me as I discover the things I did and went through in Africa and my thoughts along the way.]

October 1, 2000

Dear Family and Friends,

I send you greetings from Kenya.  Simon and Mary Kamu (my host family), Paul and Phoebe Kamu (brother to Simon, neighbor, and fellow teacher) the teachers at Muthyoi Primary School, and all those at the church in Muthyoi send their greetings to you all.  Thank you for your continued prayers.  God in His goodness is sustaining me and teaching me many things.  I am growing to love Him even more.

I can hardly believe that over one month has gone by since I arrived in Kenya.  It feels like I have been here a long time, and yet it still feels like I have just arrived.  I am still seeing and experiencing new things all the time.  Let me share some things with you.

Praises:
I am able to join the Kamu family three nights a week for family devotions and prayers.  This is a source of encouragement for me.

September 10 - I gave the message at Muthyoi AIC Church.  I talked about how Jesus is the Bread of Life as He says in John 6.  It was good for us to be reminded that Jesus knows our hearts and can fulfill our deepest needs.

September 13 - Paul Kamu's wife Phoebe gave birth to a healthy baby boy.  This is a big praise because Muthyoi is very far from a hospital and the family does not have the money for such.  She had the baby in the nearby basic clinic.  We also praised God because that night it rained, which is avery much needed because of the drought.

The kids at school enjoy having me there and seem to understand my English okay.

September 24 - I gave the message at Malooi AIC Church.  I spoke on Hebrews 12:1-3, encouraging us all to live the life of faith with endurance drawing our strength from the example of the lives of others and especially that of Jesus Christ.

Requests:

That I would find one good Kenyan friend in my village that is a girl close to my age.  I am often lonely and would like someone to talk to who is just like a friend rather than a student or other teacher.

Ability and understanding in teaching on my part as well as on the part of the kids.  I teach classes in grades 5, 6, 7, and 8 with a wide variety such as English Science, Math, Art and Craft, Music, and Christian Religious Education.  I also teach a Bible club on Wednesdays that I need ideas and encouragement in.

The Ukambani area still needs rain and the people need provisions.

For understanding on my part of what the best way for me to act and be involved is in the community and family life.

I am learning about the spiritual needs of the people and hope to share more about this in the next letter.  Please pray that God will help me in this regard.

Again, thank you for your prayers.
In Christ,
Cindy