Photo by Allison Van Zanten Photography

The following has been my favorite hymn since I was a teenager.  At many different times in my life, I have suddenly realized, in the midst of whatever I am doing, that I am singing a song to myself in my head or humming it quietly as I go, as if the song is coming right out of what is truly in the depths of my soul, without me even knowing it.

 This has been a huge encouragement to me because I remember many of these times of me realizing that I was singing this song were during happy times in my life, when it was easy to say to Jesus, "I love Thee," but more often than not, this song came from my soul when times were not happy and my soul was hurting.  There were some very dark years even when only one line or two lines would be able to come, and I would not be unable to hear the other lines or verses.  At those times, the song came more as a cry and pleading, rather than the easy humming or soft song floating in my mind.  But the song could not ever be completely uprooted from it's intertwining in the depths of my heart and life, so that as more years went by, and the darkness began lifting more and more from my life, I found that the truth of the song in my soul had taken an even deeper root, and now came out as a cry of utter devotion and a bright, flowering spring of joy!  Such a resting place for me.  Yes, I rest, and I sing, and I know that Jesus has saved me once and for all, and in every place and time.   Thank you Jesus! ...


Here is my soul's song:


My Jesus, I love Thee   (English)
William R. Featherston, 1864

My Jesus, I love Thee, I know Thou art mine;
For Thee all the follies of sin I resign;
My gracious Redeemer, my Savior art Thou:
I f ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.

I love Thee because Thou hast first loved me
And purchased my pardon on Calvary's tree;
I love Thee for wearing the thorns on Thy brow:
If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.

I'll love Thee in life, I will love Thee in death,
And praise Thee as long as Thou lendest me breath;
And say when the death dew lies cold on my brow,
"If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now."

In mansions of glory and endless delight,
I'll ever adore Thee in heaven so bright;
I'll sing with the glittering crown on my brow,
"If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus 'tis now."

#364
The Hymnal for Worship and Celebration

...And as we sang it in Kenya as I lived with the Kamba people:



Jesu Ningwendete   (Kikamba)

Jesu, ningwendete, Mutangui wakwa;
Mawendi mthuku ndimenda nongi,
We Muovosya wakwa, nzuvia kwamo.
Ndikakengwe nimo, ni thayu kuku nthi.

Yesu wiisuitwe ni wendo muno,
Nundu wambendie, ni mundu mwathe;
Na nthakame yaku yanthesya nyie vyu,
Na yuyu ningwenda kukuvitukya mbee.

Na yila wambiwe mukelanyoni
Nthakame yetika-ni nthembo kwakwa,
Na yu ndi navata kuthemba ingi,
Nundu nthembo yaku nimbianie vyu.

Yesu, watw'ikie o ta mundu ngya,
Watiie usumbi na ithe waku,
Watheeie kuu nthi uthine ta mundu,
Ni kana naitu twose uthwii waku.

Wikalo museo nuseuvitye,
We kuya kwa Ngai musyini munene;
Naw'o ukekalaa ala atheu ngoo,
Mendete kuthew'a ni Veva Mutheu.

#193
Mbathi Sya Kumutaua Ngai


AMEN...and AMEN!

~Cindy