I went down into the pit.  At the bottom, it felt dark, and alone, and hopeless.  Getting out was impossible.  

I gave up on life.  I made attempts to kill myself.  With my mind shifting to death, I died inside.  In my death, I felt no light, or warmth, or spark of a future in life.

I cried.  Help came slowly over the years.  Though I did not know it at the time, it was God who heard my cry and was pulling me out of the pit.

Now that I am out of that pit and have come from death to life, it is amazing to see that God spoke about these very things in His Word.  Take a look with me:

From the Pit
Lamentations 3:54-56 I said, ‘I am lost.’ “I called on your name, O Lord, from the depths of the pit you heard my plea, ‘Do not close your ear to my cry for help!’ 
Jonah 2:2,6 “I called out to the Lord, out of my distress, and he answered me; out of the belly of Sheol I cried, and you heard my voice…  at the roots of the mountains I went down to the land whose bars closed upon me forever; yet you brought up my life from the pit, O Lord my God.” 
Psalm 30:2-3 O Lord my God, I cried to you for help, and you have healed me. O Lord, you have brought up my soul from Sheol; you restored me to life from among those who go down to the pit. 
Psalm 40:1-3 I waited patiently for the Lord; he inclined to me and heard my cry. He drew me up from the pit of destruction, out of the miry bog, and set my feet upon a rock, making my steps secure. He put a new song in my mouth,a song of praise to our God. Many will see and fear, and put their trust in the Lord. 
Isaiah 38:17 Behold, it was for my welfare that I had great bitterness; but in love you have delivered my life from the pit of destruction, for you have cast all my sins behind your back. 
Job 33:29-30 Behold, God does all these things, twice, three times, with a man, to bring back his soul from the pit, that he may be lighted with the light of life. 
Psalm 103:2-5 Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgives all your iniquity, who heals all your diseases, who redeems your life from the pit, who crowns you with steadfast love and mercy, who satisfies you with good so that your youth is renewed like the eagle's.
From Death To Life
Psalm 56:13 For you have delivered my soul from death, yes, my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of life. 
John 5:24 Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life. He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life. 
John 12:24-25 Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. 
Romans 5:17 For if, because of one man's trespass, death reigned through that one man, much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man Jesus Christ. 
Romans 6:4 We were buried therefore with him by baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life. 
Romans 8:2 For the law of the Spirit of life has set you free in Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death. 
II Corinthians 4:7-11 But we have this treasure in jars of clay, to show that the surpassing power belongs to God and not to us. We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not driven to despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed; always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our bodies. For we who live are always being given over to death for Jesus' sake, so that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh. 
Galatians 2:20 I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God,who loved me and gave himself for me. 
Colossians 3:3-4 For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. When Christ who is your life appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
Life
Psalm 16:1,11 Preserve me, O God, for in you I take refuge… You make known to me the path of life; in your presence there is fullness of joy; at your right hand are pleasures forevermore. 
Psalm 27:1 The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? 
Psalm 34:22 The Lord redeems the life of his servants; none of those who take refuge in him will be condemned. 
Psalm 42:8 By day the Lord commands his steadfast love, and at night his song is with me, a prayer to the God of my life. 
Psalm 54:4 Behold, God is my helper; the Lord is the upholder of my life. 
Psalm 119:50 This is my comfort in my affliction, that your promise gives me life. 
Job 10:11-13 You clothed me with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews. You have granted me life and steadfast love, and your care has preserved my spirit. Yet these things you hid in your heart; I know that this was your purpose.
Isn't it amazing how God speaks to our lives long before we even know it!  God was the one who brought me up from the pit. He took my death, and gave me His life. This is how I see things now, and my wish for the future:
Acts 20:24 But I do not account my life of any value nor as precious to myself, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.
  