Dear Sarah,
I’m sorry for the late response, but better late than never right?  I want you to know that I read all your comments even If I don’t always reply right away, so rest assure I’m not going anywhere I’m always here for you.
I know your comments, questions and the things you share here are helping me and many others, so keep on doing that.
From what you wrote I understood that you are already took the step to make you life better, which if you ask me is the biggest most important step, to bring yourself to a point that you actually do something about it – and you’ve already done that, and that’s impressive and brave, remember that.
I understood that you’re already three months with 10 MG cipralex, lots of good changes are coming your way…I actually miss that feeling that things are about to change…you’ll probably feel that soon enough.

I’m happy to read you already feeling improvements in some aspects of your phobias and focus problems, give it some more time…it will get better…I think only after six months you actually feel the full effect of it and it’s enough time to prepare yourself to manage without it too.
I’m going to address your question about the heart in a separate full post but I am going to say that: from what I’ve understood and I’m no doctor, but cipralex can effect different people in different ways, so to answer your question, it’s very individual, and if there are cases of heart problems in your family your doctor is doing the right thing and taking it slowly with you, i wouldn’t worry about that too much, first of all there are many people that are happy with 10 mg and secondly there are many other pills you can take instead that work in different ways that got nothing to do with your heart… by the way you have a good sweet heart, I can tell.
So what I suggest is that you don’t think about that now at all… it’s a waste of time, you might not need to increase to 20 mg anyways, look at me, and I’m decreasing to 10 mg now, so we are taking the same amount. I’m really very sorry about your parent…  but what’s in the past is in the past. – remember that too.
Sarah I also want to thank you – for reminding me exactly what I needed to remember.
And I will post more often… J
Take care and keep writing to us too – I read it all…
Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: