Hello again my friends, I hope you’re all doing better and better with every day. I’ve been reading your comments so keep it up, it helps us all when you share your experience and opinions, and besides the more users visit the blog the more normal I feel :-)
I wish you all a
HAPPY NEW YEAR!!!
A year free of Anxiety, Depression & Panic attacks.
A year of better, happier and healthier life and state of mind
I want to begin this post with addressing the dreams issue, first because I said I would in previously, secondly because many of you talked about it in your comments and lastly because I like dreams!
Dreams are cool, at least for me, I guess it depends on how you look at it and how aware you are of yourself and your brain. The way I choose to look at it is as if the dreams are here to adjust and digest all the things that happened in the day-time. We are barely aware of the amount of information our brain is bombarded with since the second we wake up.
So I try to make the most of it, and it’s fun too.
Few Things to consider:
1.       Try controlling the general subject of the dream and make it a positive subject – this can be done by thinking about a positive thing or general positive idea just before you go to sleep.
2.       Hypnotize yourself before falling a sleep – this is a lot of fun and its very relaxing, you can simply count from 10 to 1 slowly with positive suggestions about relaxation and calm fun dreaming. (it works guys)
3.       If you want to make things even easier or if you have bad dreams - you can download any nlp or hypnosis sound files and listen to them before you go to sleep.
4.       Try listening to good relaxing music at night time.
5.       Make sure you’re comfortable in your bed.
6.       Replace your pillows, blanket and sheets to new ones.
7.       Record your rational self on tape and listen to it while you fall asleep.
8.       Get a pet
9.       Hug your gf/bf
Hope this help.
But the most important thing is to remember that dreams are fun and they are a tool for you to use for your own benefit.
I’ve met with my doc yesterday, we’re now talking about decreasing the dosage, haven’t done that yet, but I’m planning on starting with that next week. I’ll update you about that.
Comments and the comments:
You can find answers to many of your questions in previous posts too.
Take care, I will keep updating you.
Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: