this is a comment I got lately with good value in it...so I decided to post it:


Great blog... im gunna link it in one of the forums I visit often. Cipralex has also changed my life in so many ways, it's really allowed me to get back to being ME. This question is directed to the writer of this blog: I understand that you are on 20 mg right now, which is the highest dose. What do you plan on doing once that dose starts to wear off or gradually becomes ineffective? (humans develop a tolerance to any type of drug eventually). Since you are kind of "maxed out" right now, do you see yourself switching over to paxil in the future? Have you given this any thought?


Hi there, and thanks for that question I guess it may be on many people minds...
Yes I'm on 20mg cipralex in those day, and yes that's as high as it goes.



your question is smart, you think about the future...that's a smart thing to do, I'll tell you what I'm doing:


you're very right - humans do develop a tolerance to any type of drug eventually.
however - humans can also develop "routines" - what do I mean by that? well first of all I would recommend reading some books about how our brain works.. its important for understanding what you need to do.


I suffered from social phobia, anxiety, panic attacks and depression...(sometimes all mixed together... :) ...)


what I'm doing right now(while i'm cipralex) is dealing with, I'm being social and putting myself in many situations i would normally avoid, and i do it again, and again and again...until eventually I start to like it and not think about it at all... so... I hope you're getting this, it important...if you "DEAL" with the situation or the thing that freaks you out again and again and again...eventually as you said:"humans develop a tolerance to any type of drug" and as you know the human brain is the biggest fastest drug lab on this planet...
freaking out or getting panic attacks in situation is happening because our brain produce certain drugs that does that... once you change that... you change your own way of thinking of things and you don't need to take cipralex....


what I'm saying is- if you take cipralex to deal with a problem... than use this time to attack your problem... if you're scared of the darkness...don't turn on the light while you have flashlight in your hand....I hope you got that metaphor...


good luck!
Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: