Hello again my friends, and a worm welcome to the newcomers.
It’s now day number 419… wow… that’s a lot of days... and a lot of changes too...
So what going on… really? everything is good ,i cant remember the last time i had a real panic attack or depression...no side effects or anything like that ...that's nice...real nice.

"unfound said...Im afraid of taking the drug I was prescribed it, I have been diagnosed with Borderline Personality Disorder and am dreadfully afraid this drug I will need till my dying death. There are ups and downs in getting into what I call my states, my episodes, creativity ensues but in those moments I feel like the world could end and it would be perfect... What were your major side effects, did the drug make you more alert? I am also in the process of being assessed by a specialist for Adult ADHD, It is highly likely that I do have it!"
Hey, i just want you to know that what you wrote about how perfect it will be if the world could just end is something that we ALL say to ourselves from time to time... i know i sure did and meant it.

i can assure you that all of us here (fellow readers)  said that at least once and really meant it.

let me say this... if i could take time back... i would and take the pill in a much earlier stage in my life, that would save me a lot of hassle for sure... about the side effects - just read the previous posts from day 1 and you'll be able to read exactly how it was for me... in a larger perspective the side effects are no match for the upside you get from this change in your life.
"Great blog! I've been on the 10mg since October 12. I suffer from anxiety when I try to go to sleep. I lay there thinking and waiting for the noises and think about tons of other things.I now cannot attend a party I wanted to go to. Does it take longer than 6 weeks? I'm all for trying this if it eventually works, but I'm starting to get a little edgy now."
first of all thank you, now about the 6 weeks - you need to keep at it and wait, it can take couple of weeks longer - but it worth it. don't screw it up and stop in the middle. congratulations on your new job and try to take things in perspective, there are many tips I've posted before you can read and help yourself... be patience... now about that party... how come you can't go? you can and should...look at it as a good experiment to check out if cipralex did something or not. and try to have some fun!

Melissa P - just wanted to thank you for your comments and for helping people and sharing your experiences to help us all :-)

I've noticed many of you talked about the sleeping and dreams issues... i will address that on a separate post.

thank you and in case I don't see ya, good afternoon , good evening, and good night!  

Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: