Hello everybody,
I know many of you are concerned about weight gain and libido drop...
I will try to share some light about that in this post, also i have a lot to

update you guys... so here we go...

First with what concerns you...weight gain and libido drop...

About weight gain, a mild weight gain can happen, however its nothing to worry about... because its nothing dramatic, you'll hardly notice it...



You must always remember that each person react a little bit different to cipralex, so you have to notice the changes and make the right adjustments for yourself, I can tell you that haven't gained too much weight...maybe one kg, thats all, but if you feel that you're getting too "big" go out and start running, working out, or just walking, its fun and easy with cipralex. as I mention before it varies from person to person, so notice what happens with your body and react to it in the right manner.
if you think its a big change consider:
1. talking with your doctor again(maybe you need to change the dosage or try something else.
2. start eating right, in the right hours.
3. eat healthy food.
4. start working out.

now about libido, I can tell you from my experience that my libido is in tact :) however there are waves when it gets really strong and than weaker... but its manageable and it really doesn't bother me, just gives me more control over things. but if you feel there's a problem there, there are couple of things to do about it.

1. just wait... it will usually return stronger....
2. consider what you can do or think about to increase your libido
3. maybe you're not inlove or not attracted enough? love makes wonders to the libido :) at least for me...
4. enjoy the fact that you're more "relaxed" and control things, use it to your own good, to make things better.
5. you can always consult your doctor about it.
6. you can eat certain fruits and food that helps the libido and its all natural and it does work :) i've tried it once...

hope it helps, but try to take it as it come...and keep learning. smiling and try to enjoy the fact that you're aware of things, and can control them.

ok, another post with the updates i have will come later...gotta run

take care all of you!
Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: