I wasn’t planning on posting today, but after I read your comments, I felt I had to...
Jared said...
I've read a few of your different blog posts, and they've really helped me stick with it. I've been taking Cipralex since mid November (I think it was November 28th) . . . and just tonight I've been thinking more about ending my own life. I've been upped from 10mg to 20mg about 1 month ago, but I'm not feeling any effects at all. No side-effects, but no effects at all either. I'm not sure what to do . . . I have an appointment with my doctor next month but I'm not sure what can be done at this stage. Any advice? 
I understood from your comment that you’ve been taking cipralex since the end of November, lets call it December until today, which is less than two months? Correct me if I’m wrong on this…
Cipralex need some time to do its thing, and sometimes it can take up to three months until you’ll feel something. So keep at it and follow your doc orders.

You wrote “I've been thinking more about ending my own life.” . I know how it feels like, I’ve been there too, I know that you’re in this zone now where no one really understand what you’re going through and you feel like you just want to disappear but… what if…
What if I told you that in couple of months you’ll feel way better, what if I’ve told you that your life and feelings can be so different you’ll hard recognize them, what if I told you that everything is going to be just super in couple of months, would you still want to miss that?
You haven’t wrote much about who you are, what you do in life? How old are you? And who’s important to you in your life… I’d like to hear more about that so I can help you more.
You also wrote you’ve increased from 10mg to 20mg – I assume you’ll start feeling something very soon, I wouldn’t quit now anyways, you’ve already too some solid good serious steps in a good direction, give it some time.
Few things to consider:
If cipralex doesn’t work for (but first you have to continue taking it until your doc says) there are many other good alternative meds that can work for you and I’m certain you’ll doc will offer them and discuss it with you, if one thing doesn’t work – it doesn’t mean the other won’t work either, there are so many options, don’t lose hope.
There are many other spiritual things you can do, to put your faith at something, something that’s important to you, that will help you keep going.
No matter how low and down you feel right now, look at me I was there too and today I’m engaged to beautiful women, and I’m happy and cool 99% of the time. If it was possible for me it’s possible for you too.
Read the comments of other friends in this blog – you are not alone; we are all in the same boat just with different distance from shore. (That was a good metaphor wasn’t it?)
Another thing I’ve learned is that you have to think outside the box, this sentence got a deep meaning I won’t get into that right now but, you should try and learn about the medical point of view of things, read books and watch films about psychology, fear, depression, NLP, coping with depression etc’, this is one of the things I did in the beginning and it really helped me too.
ALWAYS PUT THINGS IN PROPORTION – if it’s hard for you to do this – just turn on CNN or any other news station :) …
Talk about it – talk about how you feel with your doc, with your friends or family or me, but keep the talking rolling – its important in a sub conscious level too, that will help you find solutions too.
Get a hobby, find something that you like doing, I for example started building things from wood, so I really like woodworking and it clears your mind.
NEVER GIVE UP – remember this- we’re all going to die eventually anyway, so what do you have to lose?! Keep trying and trying and trying until you get yourself to where you want to.
Eat, drink, run, laugh, spend time with friends and family, do things you enjoy doing, love.

Ok Jared, hope this help you get back in the right direction.
Your life is a prize – and that’s how you should treat them.
Take care
Until next time.
Email This
BlogThis!
Share to Twitter
Share to Facebook
Reactions: