One of the most delightful aspects of following Christ is the joy and honour of being able to worship God. The spiritual act of worshipping God is a way of life, where we offer our entire life to Him by living in a holy manner that is pleasing to Him. There are also many outward expressions of worship available to us.

Therefore, I urge you, brothers, in view of God's mercy, to offer your bodies as living sacrifices, holy and pleasing to God—this is your spiritual act of worship. Romans 12:1

Worship is:
  recognising
    acknowledging
      declaring
        delighting in
God’s:
  goodness
    holiness
      faithfulness
        love
Outwardly Expressed though:
  spending time with Him while sitting at His feet
    thanking and praising Him
      delighting our heart in Him
        adoring Him with songs of praise and worship
          writing, prayer, reading and meditating on His Word.
            living holy lives that are pleasing to God

Come, let us bow down in worship, let us kneel before the LORD our Maker; for he is our God and we are the people of his pasture, the flock under his care. Psalm 95:6-7

Exalt the LORD our God and worship at his footstool; he is holy. Psalm 99:5

Worship the LORD with gladness; come before him with joyful songs. Psalm 100:2

In a loud voice they sang: "Worthy is the Lamb, who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and praise!" Revelation 5:12

It can be difficult to worship God when our lives are beset with troubles. There have been times in my life when I said sadly, “I don’t feel like worshipping God right now.” However, to surrender ourselves to the act of worshipping God, even during our trials, is a liberating experience as by doing so, we are recognising God’s sovereignty over all things. And more, it is fulfilling our created function - He created us to worship Him. Selwyn Hughes wrote, “Nothing is more important that the worship of the One who holds my life in His hands. Because He is God then I know that no matter how things might look to the contrary, all will be well. Thus my heart delights to worship Him.”

Below is a worship poem that I wrote while still recovering from depression. Although I had struggled to consistently worship God during depression's blackest phase, when He restored hope to my life, I once again abandoned myself to the pursuit of adoring and worshipping Him with every fiber of my being.

Who Do I Dream About? - 13/4/1991
At whose feet do I sit,
while gazing adoringly into His face,
as He sits upon His throne?
At whose feet I throw myself,
so delighted to meet Him face to face?
Who is He who fellowships with me
as I enter into His Presence?
His Name is Jesus.

He is the desire of my heart.
In Him do I truly delight.
Earth has nothing that I desire besides Him,
And who do I have in heaven but Him,
the One who made all things.
He made me for Himself.
I am His, and He is mine.
He made me to fellowship with Him for all eternity.
And this is my deepest joy - to be with Him.
He is my obsession, my soul desire, my life and inspiration.

And as I lift my voice in praise,
He meets me, for He is enthroned on the praises of His people.
And His love for me is unconditional.
He sees all of my inadequacies, failings, fears and inhibitions,
And yet He loves me still.
He sees my mistakes, sin, weaknesses and imperfections,
And yet He loves me still.
His Name is indeed Wonderful, for He is Wonderful beyond words.
And regardless of how weak I am,
He never tires of me, for His love is eternal.
He is the Eternal Father of love.

Whom have I in heaven but you? And earth has nothing I desire besides you. Psalm 73:25