I had a lovely dinner party for my birthday yesterday. I gathered with 7 other friends at a local restaurant. It was really nice to get dressed up and go out. I don't get to do that very often. The food and the conversation were good. We laughed a lot, took a few pictures, and marveled at me making it to my undisclosed age!

My friend Cindy pointed out that it was only two short years ago when I was on disability--unable to work because of this illness. It was only 3.5 years ago when I was last hospitalized--unable to care for myself because of this disease. And it wasn't quite 5 years ago when I was self-medicating with alcohol--daily. Yet there I was last night, sitting with 7 sober, healthy, fun friends. Who would have guessed? Certainly not me.

We did have a lot of fun. I ate a huge steak. I deserved it after slaving away on the treadmill yesterday! I ran 14 miles at the gym, 8.5 miles on the treadmill and 5.5 miles on the 1/10 mile track. Here's how it went: 3 miles on the little track, 6 miles on the treadmill, 2 miles on the track, 2.5 miles on the treadmill, and finally 0.5 miles on the track. I can't imagine doing all of those miles exclusively on the treadmill or the track! It was horrendous enough having to do them all indoors. Splitting up the miles helped a little with the boredom, and I think it helped a lot with recovery. I'm much less sore today than I was last week after I did 10 miles on the treadmill. I'm sure the steak helped, too!

Today's been a day of rest and relaxation. I went to church this morning. Like I mentioned before, I'm sampling a new place. I like it, but I swear I'm the youngest one in the pews! Wow! Don't younger people, and I mean people younger than 70, go to church anymore? After church, Puck and I went for a long walk. It was a beautiful, sunny, clear day. Unfortunately, it was also quite cold! I let Puck off leash for a while, and he romped around in the deep snow. So cute... By the time we made our way home, napping was the only thing on the agenda, and that's what we did. Like I said, it's been a day of rest.

Hard to believe it's almost Christmas. It's a bit of a non-holiday for me. My family does not get together. We don't exchange gifts. I don't send out cards or bake cookies. It makes for a stress free holiday for me, but it makes me wish I had a family of my own to create the stress, too. Oh well, I'll do my long run and then likely spend some time with friends. I guess those friends are my family now, and there's nothing wrong with that. I'm so grateful for my wonderful friends.