     Today I am so pleased to present 6 images for my first installment of the 'Scars' Photo-series. I had a wonderful model step up and allow me to photography their self-harm scars. Both the model and I were very pleased with how they turned out. It may seem like a strange or dark subject to be photographing but it is a project very close to my heart. Please understand that these photos are of self-harm scars. If self-harm is something you are currently struggling with and feel like looking at these may be a trigger to self-harm, then I kindly ask you skip today’s post.

     The purpose is to shed some light on the feelings behind self-harm behavior. Giving names to the emotional pain behind the viable scars. The unknown is scary, for those of us that have self-harmed and those that see the scars we have left and don’t understand. I am hoping that by naming the feelings that lead us to act out in these self-harming manners, that we won’t be so scared of them anymore. That maybe our loved ones might understand a little bit better as well.
     I also hope this project can bring some healing. Reducing the shame that is felt when we see our own scars. Helping us to stop being afraid to wear those shorts, that tank top or that swimsuit, which will reveal our scars to the world. I have been there too; in fact early on I got tattoos over my most visible scars. In my case I chose tattoos that would serve as reminders to myself, but that no one on the outside would see and know I was a cutter. They are a burden, a heavy one that we wear on our skin.
     However as I recover I am looking at them in a new light. Though I never want more, those that are already here serve as badges of courage and strength. They say “It was hard, but I survived today” and “I hurt, but I am not ready to quit yet”. I am not proud, but I have also learned not to be ashamed. If someone asks I will tell them the story my scars tell.

~Samantha Lou


     So without further ado, here is the story of another wonderful individual brave enough to step forward and show their scars to the world.


'Regret & Sadness'

'Hopelessly Painful'

'Angry Hatred'

"Numb & Hollow'

"Lonely Darkness"

'Lost & Forgotten'

Q&A
with the Model


SL: How did it feel posing your scars for this project?

Model: Posting something I have kept such a hidden secret was difficult. It was acknowledging something so un-liked by the public and something my family would disapprove of.


SL: Was it hard to find the words to describe the feelings behind each scar?

Model: When making the patches of marks on my skin it was the result of a lot of emotions, so yes.


SL: How did seeing the raw pictures make you feel?

Model: Relieved. Seeing the pictures made me feel relief. Knowing I survived those times, that suicide wasn't something on my agenda anymore is a relief.


SL: What do you think of the finalized images that will be made public?

Model: Love them! I never thought I’d look at my scars and see something beautiful.


SL: Anything to share with those who feel self-conscious about their scars?

Model: Your scars are your battle. Scars are your choice to live. Each one means you survived that night, don't feel embarrassed, don't be ashamed.