Grateful...that's my primary feeling today.

I woke up yesterday feeling a little under the weather--sore throat, sinus pressure--but nothing terrible. After a wonderful 7:00 AM AA meeting, I headed to my gym. The weather outside was truly frightful with rain, slush, and muck, so I ran 5 miles on the treadmill. It was actually a nice run. I maintained a good pace and didn't get too bored. That's atypical for me and the treadmill! After running, I lifted weights for 45 minutes. I figured the weight lifting metabolism boost would serve me well later in the afternoon! I think I had 3 pieces of pie over the course of the day. I'm not sure any amount of weight lifting helps with that!

Shortly after returning from the gym, I headed over to my friends' house. I helped Bill and Cindy prepare for the small gathering. Five or six sober friends arrived later in the afternoon with food galore! We had a beautiful turkey dinner, listened to music, played cards, and laughed a lot! (Here are the MEN attacking the turkey!)
Puck got to come, too. Puck, Puppy and Bailey (Bill and Cindy's dogs) laid on the floor all day munching on their Christmas gifts. Bill gave them each a huge butcher shop bone with meat still attached! I've never seen Puck so content for so long.
After hours of attacking that bone, he fell fast asleep on their sofa. I'm sure Puck was very grateful, too, as he doesn't typically get bones like that, nor is he allowed to lie on the furniture at home.
It was a really, really nice day. By the time I got home, I was totally exhausted and went straight to bed!

I'm so grateful I had friends with whom to share the holiday. Christmas can be very difficult for many people, but I've noticed it is especially difficult for people with mental illness or those in recovery who are detached from families. Like many, I've had holidays where I've simply hung on and gotten through it. Thankfully, I didn't need to just hang on this year. My hope is that all of you had a restful, peaceful, and joyful day. Happy Holidays!