I'm feeling ambivalent about writing today. And that's probably not the best opening line with which to attract your attention. Let me explain. I'm feeling ambivalent about writing because I don't feel like I have much to offer about what is currently happening. I'm caught wanting to do more than just report what's happening. I feel an obligation, as the writer of this blog, to find or create some meaning out of the recent events. And I guess I'm not feeling able to do that on this day. So here goes the reporting...

There have been two deaths in the past few days which have hit close to home. Last night I attended the service for a local man--a political figure--who was a member of my church. He died suddenly last week. While I wouldn't say he and I were friends, his wife and I are more acquainted, I did enjoy and respect this man. He was a talented stained glass artist. He was a political activist who stood up for the little man, including those of us with mental illness, and his wacky, dry sense of humor was second to none. His presence will be missed in our church and in this community.

I thought about this man and his family all night and into this morning. He and his wife were soul mates, still deeply in love 44 years later. So tragic... And then I signed into Facebook this morning and discovered a pillar of our AA community lost his wife yesterday afternoon. This man is beloved in our local AA crowd, and while his wife has been sick, I don't think her death was necessarily expected. Similar to the couple from my church, this man and his wife also shared a deep, abiding love and friendship.

Ironically, one day after losing his wife, this man celebrated his 49th year of sobriety at our AA meeting tonight. Wow. When he accepted his 49 year medallion there wasn't a dry eye in the house. It was intense. I so, so respect this man, too. I will be offering condolences at the exact same funeral home again tomorrow night.

And that's all I've got. Is there a take home message in two close-to-home deaths, each of which separated one soul mate from the other, from two well-respected families within a week? I don't know. It is what it is. Life. And death. I don't know what else to say.