It's been a crazy, busy week here. And with the oppressive heat wave we've been having, things have only seemed crazier and busier. It's been so hot and humid, it's been difficult to motivate or even move! I'm really looking forward to the upcoming holiday weekend. I can't wait to sit back and relax.

Jet and I will be off for an extended weekend at D's lake house immediately after work on Friday. We have little planned, well, little except running through the woods, spending time with friends, eating great food, lounging with good coffee, boating, water skiing, kayaking, reading, and of course, napping. Right now that last option sounds the most appealing!

Actually, the only concrete weekend plan I have is my 20-mile run through the woods early Saturday morning. Other than that, everything else is open and optional! I am really looking forward to more time with D. I've missed him since our last weekend together, and that was only two weeks ago! It will be so nice to be together in the peace, beauty and quiet of the lake.

I'm also looking forward to tomorrow. I have the day off, and I have lots of things on my to-do list, but by late afternoon it will be all about laughter and friendship. I'm spending the evening with two of my good friends. We try to get together every few weeks, but with work and family schedules, it usually ends up being more like once every couple of months. No matter, we always find time.

Life is always breezier after the three of us spend time together. Tomorrow we're going to hang out at one friend's house, chat and laugh, order pizza, jump on the trampoline, laugh some more, solve each others' problems, polish our nails, giggle, solve the world's problems, and probably laugh all the way home. It's always a fun, energizing time. I can't wait.

Right now, however, I can't wait to hit my pillow. I'm looking forward to my bed. Other than tired, Jet and I are both doing well. I've even been able to reduce one of my anti-depressants! But that's another post for another day. Until then, stay healthy, friends!