Surprise, surprise!
A couple days ago, I decided to run a half-marathon, which I did today. It's an annual, popular race in my community, but I hate it. It's almost always steamy hot, and the course is an out and back to nowhere. The turn-around is on a gravel road, which really hurts my feet after a couple miles, and it is almost always windy, too! I hate it.

So I ran it! The timing was right. I just completed my fifth week of marathon training, so a long mid-length race made sense. Besides, it's always easier to run faster in a race than when running alone around a track! I was also curious to see where my fitness was at, especially after my disappointing performance at Grandma's Half Marathon in June. So I ran the half marathon today.

I ran, and I ran it well! I was unsure what to expect. I knew I wasn't in shape to run as fast as I wanted, 1:45 or less, but I was hoping to go under 1:50. For reference, my best half-marathon time is 1:36. It really sucks getting old and chubby! But I digress... I ran well today. My slowest mile, at 8:33, was mile 1, which is always a good thing! Most significantly, I felt comfortable until around mile nine. Even after getting uncomfortable, I was able to maintain my pace. I did slow at the end, however, which I don't like to do. If the race had ended at mile 12 I would have been thrilled! I happily crossed the finish line at either 1:47:09 (race clock) or 1:48:09 (my watch).

Regardless of the official time, I exceeded my expectations today. It's always nice to look down at my watch and see my pace is faster than I feel I'm running. I ran several miles under 8:10, but I felt like I was running around 8:30. I love that! Furthermore, it was an absolutely gorgeous day! As usual, there was a head wind after the turnaround, but it was a cool, dry wind. Unbelievable. It was a good day. It was a challenging day.

One of my biggest challenges today was combating my brain's negative talk. Racing, for me, is often combative. It's me versus my brain in a no-holds-barred, knock 'em down, drag 'em out, gloves-off brawl. As soon as my brain learned I was feeling comfortable at a quicker than average pace, it's onslaught began. It went something like this:

Brain: (mile 2) What the hell are you doing? You can't sustain this pace!
etta: Shut-up!
Brain: (taunting) You can't. You can't. You're going too fast!
etta: Shut-up!
Brain: You shut-up!
etta: SHUT-UP!
Brain: (mile 3) Still too fast. You're going too fast! You're not going to feel good much longer!
etta: I'm not listening!
Brain: You better slow down. I'm telling you...slow down now or it's going to get ugly!
etta: Shut-up! I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain: No you don't! You're just saying that!
etta: (yelling) I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain: (miles 4,5,6) YOU ARE NOT IN SHAPE FOR THIS PACE! NO WAY! Not for 13 MILES!
etta: (fingers in ears) La-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la... I can't hear you!
Brain: Yes, you can. I know you can. You're starting to get worried. You know I'm right. Ugly, ugly, ugly...going to get ugly! You better slow down!
etta: (repeatedly) I love this race. I love this pace. I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain: Shut-up, shut-up, shut-up!
etta: (miles 4,5,6,7,8,9, 10) I love this race. I love this pace. I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain:(mockingly) I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain: (miles 9, 10, 11) Oh, you're hurting now, aren't you? Serves you right! I told you...too fast.
etta: And yet, I'm still on the same pace!
Brain: (mockingly) And yet, I'm still on the same pace! Oooooooohhh....
etta: I love this race. I love this pace.
Brain: Wait 'till next time! I'll get you...you and your stupid mantra!
etta: (mile 13) I think I'm going to have a heart attack...
etta: (mile 13.1) Thank God! I'm done!

This exchange is common when I race. Racing requires that I battle my overly negative brain. That brain...he's a tough one. But unlike with depression, where my brain has the upper hand, when I'm running a race I usually beat him. The physical and mental challenge of racing is exhausting. But beating my brain? That's a beautiful thing. It makes the exhausting battle totally worthwhile. Today was totally worthwhile.