Happy Holidays to everyone! I hope you all spent time with people you love. However, as I noted in my last post, I know that's sometimes an issue for those of us with mental illness. For a variety of reasons, we may spend this holiday of all holidays alone. As for me, I had time with friends, but I also spent a lot of time alone.

For me, the last two days were, in many ways, nothing more than normal days. I ran. I biked. I cleaned my house. I went to my AA meeting. I did my laundry. I watched television. I went grocery shopping. I updated Facebook. I listened to NPR. Normal days...

For a variety of reasons, I didn't see family. I didn't open presents. I didn't have a house full of people. Christmas eve, in particular, was a very long day. And I'd be lying if I said I didn't feel a little sorry for myself.

After working out, cleaning, doing some laundry, and grocery shopping, there was nothing left to do. My friends were spending time with their family. My family was silent from afar. The special-ness of the day was evident everywhere I went--from the excited families and lovers last minute shopping in Walmart, to the extra cars with far away license plates crowding my street. I began to feel very, very sad.

I got dressed up and went to church that evening. It was a beautiful service, but again, it was impossible not to feel very, very alone. I sat in the back. There was one other woman, apparently alone as well, sitting in my pew. Before me the church was filled with smiling extended families. I was envious. Perhaps it would have been better not to go, yet sitting alone at home wouldn't have felt good either. I left the service feeling a strange combination of celebration and sadness.

I teared up as I got into my car. I could have gone home and really let the sadness overtake me, but I dialed my phone instead. When Cindy answered my voice broke. "Why don't you come over here," she said? And so I did. I collected Puck, put on some sweats, and headed back out the door. For a moment, I had stood on the precipice of the hole, but thankfully I didn't jump in. I'm so glad I made that call.

Yesterday was another normal day until dinner, at which time Puck and I headed out again. Bill and Cindy made a lovely dinner, we chuckled our way through A Christmas Story, and we lounged around listening to Christmas tunes together. A nice, relaxed time was had by all.

It was Christmas, and ultimately, I spent my time with the family I love, the family who knows me best, and the family with whom I can most be myself. That was my Christmas. I hope you, too, found your family over these past two days. I hope you did what you needed to do to keep yourself safe and healthy. Happy Holidays, my friends.