Wow...I don't know what's gotten into me, but I've had a very productive couple of days! After a wonderful Thanksgiving Day with my friends, I've spent the last two days cleaning and reorganizing my house. This is not normal for me! But thank God I finally got a burr in my saddle and got going.

The biggest accomplishment was getting my basement re-stocked. I had to empty it out in order for the renovation to begin last spring. Unfortunately, that meant I had to fill up my garage with all the of the basement stuff. I've not been able to use my garage since last spring. With the snow beginning to fly, emptying my garage had taken on new urgency. And so I tackled it...finally!

It's amazing what you can do when you live alone. I was certain emptying my garage and carrying heavy things back into the basement was a two person job. It wasn't. By the time I had finished doing what I could do, I only had three things for which I needed a hand. My friend Bill obliged, and we took care of the remaining heavy items.

One funny note about this whole process. I've been toting around an extremely heavy, non-operable treadmill for the past 6-7 years. It needed a new motor, but I never bothered to get one. Finally, with the help of Bill and his daughter, we got the damn thing out of my house and to the curb. I put a free sign on it, noting of course that it needed a new motor. It sat there overnight, so yesterday I called my garbage company and scheduled a Monday pick-up. Five minutes later I looked outside, and it was gone! Thank you! I hope whomever took it puts it to good use.

Speaking of treadmills, I had to do my 8-mile tempo run indoors on Thursday. I hated it, but it was just too damn cold. It was almost as cold yesterday for my final long run before Dallas, but I went outdoors anyway. I stayed in the woods and let Puck run free. It's so much easier to run when I can focus on him and his happiness. Plus, he can run so much further when he's off leash. We did 6 miles together before I dropped him at home and finished alone. I only had to do 10 miles, and the sun was shining, so that was nice. Dallas is seven days away!

Well I'm off to church. I'm sampling a new venue. I need a little more spirituality than my current church provides. Then it's off to the pool for a nice recovery swim before I settle in for some afternoon football. Perhaps I'll even begin organizing that basement full of stuff. If I do, someone better take my temperature, because that would be unusually productive!