Two days ago, my treatment team decided it was time to go to the hospital. I'm not there. Long story short, there were no psych beds available in the local hospital. Actually, there were no beds available in the entire state of Minnesota. How crazy is that? Can you imagine a cancer patient needing to be hospitalized and being told, "Sorry, no bed for you." I could get into a long, political discussion about why there are so few psych beds available, but I just don't have the energy for it. It's yet another example of how mental illness is not treated on par with other illnesses. Let's leave it at that.

So for the past three days, I've been staying with my friends, Bill and Cindy. They've graciously taken me in and agreed to keep track of me. They are my safety net for now, and it is a relief to be here. My MD has taken me off work, so I can take my meds as needed without fear of them making me too sleepy to treat my patients. I don't have to cook. And I have someone to sit with when things feel particularly dark. It's not the hospital, but it's safer than being home alone.

At home alone, my safety was becoming an issue. As is typical, when my mood grew darker, my thoughts grew more frightening. I am not suicidal. Let me repeat that, I am not suicidal. But part of my darkness includes violent, scary thoughts. And fighting violent, scary thoughts for days and days became exhausting. Some of the violent, scary thoughts began to look more appealing. If I gave up fighting the thoughts, I could finally give up...get a break...rest. I guess it's sort of a passive suicidal state. I had no plans to kill myself, but I wasn't sure how long I could have kept fighting. Hence, the hospital recommendation.

At this point, there are still no hospital beds available. I'm in the land of limbo. My thinking has been slightly better since arriving here, but after spending two hours alone at home today it was clear nothing had changed. I came back feeling bruised and battered, and I immediately fell asleep. I'm doing the best I can, yet I'm not sure what I'm supposed to be doing. I feel stuck. I want to be working. I want to take Puck to the vet. I want to follow through on my commitments. But I haven't been able to do those things, and I'm not sure when I should start testing the waters. Limbo. I hate this illness.