I've been a total slug today. That is, I've been a total slug since returning home around 10:00 AM after running my second half marathon in the last seven days. I raced last Saturday morning in Madison, Wisconsin. This morning, exactly 7 days since the gun went off in Madison, I toed the starting line in downtown Rochester. Wise? Probably not.

Scheduled to do a 13-15 miler today, anyway, I decided to join the crowd at my local half marathon. I began by slowly running the mile from my home to the race start as a warm-up. I planned, out loud, to do this half marathon not as a race, but as my training run, albeit a little faster than normal training pace. I thought I could probably comfortably handle 8:00 to 8:05 pace and then run a relaxed cool-down home afterward.

I actually did stick to my plan. I went through the first 3 miles at exactly 8:05 pace. We hit the highlight of the course, a long, long, constantly climbing, fairly steep hill shortly thereafter. It hurt. It hurt everyone. I actually passed many people on the way to the top, which was nice, but my legs never fully recovered for the rest of the race. And that's when I should have changed the plan. Instead, I stuck to it.

By sticking to the plan, I ended up "racing" the rest of the course. That is, even though I stuck to my plan to run around 8 minutes per mile, 8 minutes per mile was no longer a comfortable pace. It was racing pace. I really don't think I could have run any faster. So my training run turned into a race, and by the end I was wiped out! Ironically, I finished in 1:44:51, and guess what? That's an 8:01 per mile pace. Like I said, I did stick to the plan.

Sometimes the wiser course of action is to alter, rather than stick to the plan! Hopefully learning has occurred, but I doubt it! I spent the rest of today recovering. I ate a delicious, way-to-big-burger and fries after the race. And I spent the rest my time, i.e. all day, stretched out in bed, curled up on the sofa, or sitting in my recliner doing absolutely nothing. Well, I did drive 5 minutes to the grocery store about an hour ago, as I needed some ice cream and chocolate syrup! It's been a non-productive, sleepy, fattening day. So much for that damn plan!

Actually, it's not so bad. I've accepted being a sloth today. I have to work tomorrow, so I know I'll not carry my sluggishness into another day. I'll remember this lesson if and when a similar situation arises in the future, but knowing me, I may overdo it again anyway. Oh well. I do enjoy challenging myself, even if it isn't always the brightest thing to do.