It's been over seven years since I created and began writing this blog. When I began there were plenty of skeptics among the few people I told. The same questions arose time and time again. Why? Who would want to read about depression? There were worries that focusing on depression would only increase my symptoms. In general, there were more questions and concerns than there was encouragement. I quickly learned to stop telling people what I was planning to do. I just did it.

Writing this blog partially arose out of my frustration with how I had been treated by everyone from friends and family to employers to medical personnel. Depression, I thought, was quite misunderstood. My other goal for this blog was to offer my experience, strength and hope to anyone who might read it. Writing had always been helpful for me, and I was hopeful my words might help someone else, too.

That brings me to the crux of this post. This blog is about my experience, strength and hope. I hope I have succeeded in avoiding political discussions, opinions, and preaching. I have no intention of telling others what I think is best, or better, or right. I have tried my best to educate others about depression through my eyes and based on my research.

That being said, I am a medical professional. And based on research, I have called depression a diagnosable, biological illness of the brain; no different than having a brain tumor, for example, which may cause exactly the same symptoms. Depression is no more my fault than is having cancer or diabetes or MS. I differ with those out there who consider depression a character defect. It is an illness, and I believe it should be treated like an illness.

I have no opinion on the treatment you choose. If it works for you, please keep doing it. I find a comprehensive treatment plan which includes a positive, healthy lifestyle, balanced sleep, quality food, exercise, sobriety, regular professional (psychiatrist, therapist) contact, and medications are required to keep my depression under control. I risk my health if any of these components are lacking or get out of whack.

Recently, I've received many comments questioning depression as a medical issue. Comments which are anti-medication have been somewhat prevalent. Many of these have included links to other sites, which I generally do not publish, so you haven't seen most of the comments. (Links to sites I have no knowledge of do not make it into my comment section. It's my blog. I am here to share my experience, strength, and hope, not the opinions of others.)

I'm frustrated, however, by these anti-medication, anti-illness comments. Maybe I shouldn't be, but I feel like I've failed somehow to get my point across. I know there are natural cures for depression, just as there are natural cures for everything else on the planet. And like I said, if it works for you, keep doing it. But calling medications dangerous and placebos really cranks me up.

It's shortsighted to call all depression medications bad. And I want to know if people preaching the "dangers" of depression meds would preach similarly about meds for schizophrenia, MS, cancer, or diabetes? Medications have side effects. It's up to each of us to weigh whether the direct effects outweigh the side effects for each pill we choose to take. If you can cure your illness without meds, that's great for you, but that doesn't make my choice bad or dangerous.

If I could get away with it, I wouldn't take an aspirin. But I can't get away with that. I'd be miserable and eventually, depression, my brain illness, would take my life. Instead, I choose to stay alive, to live my life to the fullest, and to get everything I can out of it. To do that my illness requires I use medications as one piece of a comprehensive treatment plan. Evil, dangerous, bad depression meds?  That has not been my experience, and this blog is about my experience, strength, and hope.