Not much to report today, and that's a good thing. It was a gray day, but I had a list of things to do, and I accomplished them all. I love crossing things off a list. It makes me feel so productive.

Unfortunately, my first order of business was battling with a health care company about a $600 bill, which they had no business sending me! I do not owe them $600, yet there I sat with the bill. I've battled with this company before. They can't seem to figure anything out. It's frustrating. I said my piece, stomped around the house for a few minutes, and then tried to let it go. I hate having to deal with this kind of shit, especially before finishing my morning coffee!

Things got better from there. I finished my coffee while taking care of some business over the phone. I ordered refills of my meds. I took Puck for his 1.5 mile run, which served as my warm-up. After dropping Puck at home, I completed a daunting speed workout. I ran 10 x 400 meters at 7 minute per mile pace. I thought it would be way more difficult than it was. I actually ran them all around 6:45 pace, and I felt great afterward--not overly tired or drained. I love it when my running feels like that!

After my shower, I did some more painting. I'm getting close to finishing. One more coat and I'll be done. Finally. Then it was time for a luxurious 2 hour nap. I do take a lot of naps, but I rarely have the time nor the inclination to just let go and sleep. I had nothing pressing to take care of afterward, so I just relaxed. It was lovely.

In the evening, I did a little shopping for some new lights. The old lights look really bad now that I've spiffed up the place. Then I attended my usual AA meeting before going out to dinner with my parents. We had the never-ending pasta at The Olive Garden. I'm stuffed! My mom and step dad are leaving town tomorrow. I'm still sad about that, but that's life. I'll survive. It was nice to have dinner with them.

It was a good day. Things are going well. There is life with depression, and life is what I've been doing lately. Pretty normal stuff... Pleasantly non-dramatic. I'll take it.