Between running speedy workouts and painting for hours on end, I am sore. My legs hurt from my speed workout. I'm not used to running that fast anymore, but that's what my training plan called for, so I did it. Of course standing and painting my basement for hours probably contributed to the sore legs, and I know it's the reason for my aching shoulders! I need an ice pack!

I needed some sustenance after my long day of painting and running, so I went out to eat with my mom and step-dad. They are full-time RV'ers, and they will only be in town another two weeks. I'm bummed about that. They were supposed to stay until the end of October, but their plans changed. They're leaving at the end of September instead. Worse yet, they won't be coming back next summer. They've been here three summers in a row, and it's been really nice having my mom around. She left when I was twelve, and I had spent very little time with her until they began coming here for the summers 3 years ago. I've enjoyed spending time with her. Of course, the fact that she cooks for me is nice, too. I'll miss that. I'll miss them.

I'm sure my mom would be surprised to read that last sentence. We don't exactly have a touchy-feely relationship. I'm still fairly guarded around her. I don't know why. It's just the way it is. I've gotten a lot better over the past several years. I think just being around her more has helped. It also helps that I've learned to live life through the AA program. I've learned to be more honest, grateful, and real. And that has helped me be a little more open with my mom. I still don't know if I'll be able to tell her I'll miss her though. Isn't that dumb?

I envy people who have easy relationships with their parents. I envy families that express their feelings for each other. There's a lot of trash in our past in my family. We also weren't raised to say things like, "I love you." Strange? I don't know. That's just how it was/is. But like I said, I've gotten better with my mom, and I'm a work in progress, so I'll keep working on it.

I'd love to hear how things were in your families. Is my situation weird, or is it more normal than I think? Do you tell your parents you love them? Do you have kids who say that without a thought? Or is it rare to hear those words in your family, as it is in mine? Just curious...

And on that note, I'm off to rest my weary bones in bed. Good night.