I just returned home from Milwaukee. It was a short visit, as usual, to see D. We had a very nice time. Even though he had to work a bit yesterday, we got to spend some quality time together. I went for a 13 mile run, a 1.5 mile walk with Jet, and took a much needed nap while D worked.

He came home in time for us to spend the afternoon together at a nice bookstore. Last night, we went out for an Italian dinner with D's 31 year old son. We finished up the evening with a delicious decaf caramel latte at the local, trendy coffee shop. I have to say, it was the best caramel latte I have ever had! It was fitting, comfortable end, to a busy but comfortable day.

This was Jet's first visit to D's home. He was quite playful and rambunctious, which doesn't bother me in the least in my own home, but I found myself worried when he was racing around D's house. You see, D was not a dog person at all prior to meeting me. In fact, Puck was the first, and only dog ever allowed in his home. His family was stunned when they found out he allowed it! Of course, I told him on day one that we were a package deal. Jet is now the second dog D's allowed to cross the threshold. Fortunately, I think I worried needlessly. D enjoyed playing with him, even if Jet didn't yet have the best manners.

Together, D and I took Jet for a slow run-walk this morning prior to going on our own 6 mile run. It was foggy and raining, but it was nice to run together, nonetheless. After he made me some delicious pancakes, we both lingered, unwilling to separate; me to go home, D to go back to work. But the weather was a bit threatening, and I had no desire to get caught up in an ice storm, so I eventually left.

I'm now safely at home. Jet is racing around tossing and chasing his bone, as I sit here with heavy eyelids. I sure wish D and I didn't live so far apart. Our visits are short, it's always difficult to leave, and I'm usually exhausted when I return home. Regardless, I'm grateful for D and for our growing relationship. It's really nice to have someone special in my life.