I want to share my story so that you can get a better idea of why I’m starting this blog. It’s going to be hard to condense it all into one post but I will do my best, so lets get right to it. 
It started when I was a junior in high school. I started drinking with a group of friends every weekend. We’d go to an abandoned house in the middle of winter with no heater and a big bottle of Taaka (the cheapest, grossest kind of vodka there is). Then we’d typically rock-paper-scissors for who would have to drive home, since at that point we were all drunk. This phase lasted about a year. Just drinking on weekends, always hiding it, always lying to my parents. I wasn't drinking because I was sad or anything… just bored. 
Senior year- I entered a great relationship and never felt the need to drink. I was so happy and distracted with that relationship that drinking wasn’t ever a priority. 
The problem really started my freshman year of college. I joined a sorority… Depending on who you are, being a member of the Greek life CAN be an amazing thing. You gain lots of connections and friends and you are put in a position to be a leader and help with things like philanthropy and charities in your city etc. I think it’s safe to say that I didn’t take advantage of any of positive things that came out of Greek life. Halfway through the year I had gotten my heart broken and used alcohol to cope with the pain. This relationship would bring lots of heartbreak but the worst part was how I dealt with it. 
I would black out so much that almost my entire college career was a blur. I would always drive home completely hammered and then go to work the next day with a huge hangover. I realized later on that the reason I would always drive home was because my anxiety would get so bad that just the idea of sleeping in a different bed other than my own freaked me out. 
This went on for about a year and the relationship that I was in kept going back and forth because of stupid decisions. 

Here is where I hit rock bottom…

My parents found out that I had stopped going to my classes so they gave me an ultimatum- I could either leave the house with nothing or I could stay in their home with a 10pm curfew. Since I was going through a serious heart break and the only thing numbing me was alcohol, I didn’t think staying home was an option. I left my house so fast and had a friend drop me off at a frat house because that’s the only place I had at the time. 
For the next few weeks I would sleep from couch to couch. Either my sorority house or my best friends parents house. I didn’t have any money for food because I didn’t have a car to get me to my job, so I eventually had to quit. I started eating at the sorority house, which caused issues. (You’re not allowed to eat at the sorority house if you don’t pay live-in dues) I had talked to our house mom and president and they said that I could stay there as long as I needed but I wasn’t about to explain my life story to every girl in the house so naturally I gained enemies. I would get girls giving me dirty looks all the time as I went into the kitchen. Little did they know, the only thing I had put in my body in the last 3 days was beer because the frat boys will give you that for free. 
I was drinking beer for breakfast, lunch and dinner solely because I didn’t have another option and it filled me up enough to get me through the day. 
I hadn’t talked to my parents in weeks. I was heartbroken and alone and really didn’t feel like I had anyone to turn to. I would drink and cry myself to sleep and then repeat. It was impossible to stop. 
Right around the same time, one of my friends from high school was killed in a car accident. The second that happened I started thinking about death more than I ever had. I started thinking about how much better my life would be if I were to die. I was actually jealous of my friend who had died. I would plan my own funeral in detail and I would think about who would show up, since at that point I assumed it would be no one. 
This went on for about a month until finally, my aunt and uncle got in touch with me and took me to lunch. They explained how scared they were for my life and how much everyone wanted me to come home. At that point I was done being stubborn and I completely broke down. I called my parents and told them that I would do anything to come back home. 
Shortly after I moved back home, my boyfriend and I got back together and my life became somewhat peaceful for a few months. But the following summer came pretty quick and my parents started easing up on my curfew and restrictions. At that point, my boyfriend and I were on the rocks again and were fighting all the time because of alcohol and more bad decisions so once again, we broke up. This time, I had a new group of girl friends and we were all single so I spent the summer partying every night with them. I was able to hold a job but I would still drink every night without fail. I turned 21 and went to Vegas for the Lil Wayne concert and don’t remember most of the weekend. I went to the Ellie Goulding concert and got so drunk that I hit my head on the bathroom floor and got a concussion. I just couldn’t stop. The second I had one drink I wouldn’t stop until I had consumed ten drinks. 

Another year went by and the 4 year relationship that I had so desperately wanted to work had officially ended. It was awful and all I wanted to do was use alcohol to ease the pain but this time I tried something different. I told myself I was going to go 6 months completely sober so that I could face the pain of the break up to the best of my ability and move forward with my life. I didn’t want anything holding me back from being able to move on. 
I believe in God and there is no way he wasn’t watching over me during this time because just two weeks into this 6 month trial, I met my future husband, Trevor. From that day forward, Trevor helped me accomplish my 6 months sobriety goal, he helped me gain back my confidence, he helped me rekindle my relationship with God and he helped me remember what it felt like to feel worth something. 
It is now December 2015. I am happily married and I have an amazing job with great friends but my story doesn’t end here. I still struggle every single day with self worth. I still find myself subconsciously planning my own funeral when I’m sitting at work. I still write out suicide notes in my head and know exactly who I would give them to because I know who would need the closure the most. But the point in all of this is to remind myself that through all of that struggle, I am still LIVING. I still make an impact in ways I’m not even aware of and some people in this world need me and I HAVE to remember that.  
YOU have to remember that too. If you are struggling with the same or similar things, then you HAVE to remember whose life you would be ruining if you took your own. 

So here I go… Here is my attempt to help show people how they can live too. 