My dog doesn't know we turned the clocks back last night. Right on schedule, he was at my bedside wagging his tail. Unfortunately, today it was 5:30 AM rather than 6:30 AM; not that my body knows the difference either. I'm not a fan of turning the clocks back. I'd much rather have an extra hour of daylight during the evening, when I'm awake, than in the morning. It's time to get out my SAD light, I guess.

I had a good day yesterday. The hole in my heart is healing just a bit. I spent the first 4 miles of my 15 mile run letting Puck romp through the woods. He made me smile, and smile, and smile. I love watching him romp free, especially now. He is the picture of unabashed joy. After dropping him back at home, I finished my 15 miles. It was sunny and crisp, and my run went very well. I recovered while watching some entertaining college football, took a nap, and then got ready for an evening out.

Last night was my AA group's monthly celebration of sobriety anniversaries. A friend was celebrating one year of sobriety. We began the evening with his family at a nice local restaurant. It was a bit of splurge for me, but I figured I deserved it. After our dinner, we went to the meeting where cakes are presented. Each person who celebrated a sobriety anniversary in the previous month received a cake. Last night we celebrated almost 200 total years of sobriety with families and friends. It was a night filled with gratitude. It was also a good reminder of what I've been doing over the past several years--getting healthy.

That fact, the fact that I've spent my time getting healthy, doesn't take the sting out of not having children (see previous post). I'm trying to believe what others are telling me--that I was doing important work on myself battling depression and getting sober. I'm trying not to waste energy on regret and resentment. I don't know if I'm succeeding.

I think I'll always regret not having kids, but I can't do anything about it now. I'll let the sting subside with time, but the regret, I'm sure, will always remain. Resentment, on the other hand, I have to let go. I resent the illness which took the option of children away from me and sidetracked my life. That's where I'm stuck now. And resentment isn't good for me. I have to pray for the willingness to let it go. I'll take any prayers you have, too. Thanks.