     First of all I apologize for the delay in posts. Between a busy work week and being sick I fell behind. However after that I have no excuse. Not posting simply came down to a lack of motivation. A feeling of being stuck, a mindset of I'd rather crawl in to bed. If you struggle with depression you know this feeling well.
     It is the trademark of depression. Losing interest in things, loss of motivation, and lack of will to get up and go. Or in this case to write. I didn't even notice it, because I didn't drop everything. Because you don't always. I know for me it’s always a gradual fade. It starts with things I'm less interested in, or that may be more stressful. (For me writing these posts can sometimes be a bit emotionally taxing, so they can take some extra motivation to write).
     It’s normal in life to loss interest in certain things over time. To be a bit more resistant or put off doing things that might be outside your comfort zone. Interests change and fluctuate. But with depression it’s really important to keep an eye on these things. I know for myself if I start making excuses like I'll shower tomorrow, it my depression taking hold.
     Even when I'm doing well, my depression is always fighting me for control of my life, my day, my hour. It can take a huge amount of energy to will myself to get up, showered, and dressed. Sometimes that's enough victory for a day. Other times I will fight from dawn till dusk to write, draw, paint, go out, talk to others, or even just stay down stairs with the family.
     Sometimes I'm too tired to fight, giving in to a day of laying in bed watching Netflix. Not because I'm lazy, not because I want to. Then I will often spend the whole time worrying about things I need and want to get done or do. This tends to make me feel even worse. That's what it does. On these kinds of day I try to instead focus on what I will fight to do tomorrow. Make a list, make a plan. I try to focus less on what I could be doing now and focus more on resting up to beat depression for control of tomorrow.
     It helps to have a motive, an end goal, or reward. Some days I reward myself with a nap- I will get up, work on what I wanted to, then take a nap, giving myself a bit of extra energy to tackle my next task, whatever it may be. I also try to keep myself motivated by envisioning what I want the end result to be (mostly with my art), so I will fight to complete a piece, even if it means I am up all night. Because I know if I put it down unfinished it will likely stay that way.
     I frequently pray for the strength to beat my depression for control of my day. I try to focus on the positives of my day. Most commonly it’s the little details in nature that's help me push through my harder days. Wildflowers on the side of the road, a fun shaped cloud, my dog being in an extra playful mood. There is good and beautiful things happening everyday and if I stay in bed I will miss them.
     I even use Pokémon GO to help motivate myself to get up and go do my grocery shopping. Maybe I'll catch something I don't have yet. I use the knowledge that if I go to D&D this week I'll go home with an amusing story. I find that with myself its these little motivations that help me the most. Like writing to days post, my motivation is the hope that it will help at least one person feel less alone in their daily depression struggle.
     Some days are harder than others to find the motivation to get out of bed. It is important to try anyways. Some days we win, some we don't. The important part is to not stop fighting. So find your motivation, figure out what helps you do what needs to be done, don’t let your depression control your day.

~Samantha Lou