I had a great run today at The Med-City Marathon! I bumped into my friend and co-worker, Maureen, at the starting line, and we quickly decided to help each other. She was attempting to re-qualify for Boston, for which I am already qualified, and was looking to run around 8:50 per mile. Perfect. As I stated in my post yesterday, my plan was to run just under 9 minutes per mile for at least the first 10 miles. So we started the race together.

Around mile 3, we began conversing with a third woman, Beth from Des Moines. She was also running our pace, so the three of us ran and talked together for the next 11 miles. Unfortunately, Maureen dropped off the pace just before mile 14, so Beth and I continued together. We ran stride for stride, chatted, and quickened our pace with each successive mile. Beth dropped back just before mile 20, so I went ahead alone.

It had begun to rain around mile 18, and by mile 20 it was raining steadily. With the temperature only in the mid-40's, a stiff wind, and the soaking rain, it got a bit chilly, but I didn't mind. I ran mile 21 in 8 minutes, 13 seconds. After slowing to 8:24 the next mile, I ran miles 23, 24, and 25 at 8:14 each. I felt great despite the rain. Mile 26 was my fastest mile of the day, 8:09, and I finished the final two tenths of a mile at a strong, but still comfortable, 7:40 pace. It was great.

There is nothing better than flying toward the finish of a marathon and feeling good all the while. I finished in a very respectable 3:46:02. I was the 25th of 143 women overall and 9th out of 42 women in my age group. That was all nice, but I was most pleased with running a huge negative split. I ran the second 13.1 miles of the race 7 minutes and 20 seconds faster than I ran the first 13.1 miles! That was pretty cool.

I am quite pleased that I stuck to my plan. I ran conservatively for the first 15 miles. I was easily able to drop my pace after that, and running as fast as I did over the last 10 kilometers was a bonus I did not expect. I enjoyed running with Maureen and Beth. We talked the entire way, and the miles quickly clicked by. I rarely run with other people, and almost never do I chat during a race, especially a marathon! But I was comfortable, relaxed and having fun. It was fun!

I'm now feeling more confident about my current level of fitness. I'm feeling more confident about the possibility of running well at Grandmas. If my training over the next four weeks goes well, I may just try to run a personal best. We'll see. That's more than I need to think about right now. I think I'll continue glowing about today for just a few more minutes first.