If it wasn't happening to me, I don't think I'd believe this. It's a long story which began in 2011. At that time I was so seriously ill I was granted Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits, as I was unable to work. I was grateful for the assistance even though the monthly benefit was only one third of my pre-illness income. I barely paid my bills and ate only through the generosity of the local food shelf. That was a tough time. My depression was horrible.

If I'm remembering correctly, I received SSDI benefits for approximately 6 months while I slowly returned to health and gainful employment. I wrote about what happened next in this post from March, 2012.  Basically, my monthly benefit continued to arrive despite the fact I had notified Social Security of my return to work.

Shortly after they finally stopped sending me checks, Social Security sent me a letter demanding repayment of over $12,000. The amount, which was wildly inaccurate, totally freaked me out! I had to battle with the Social Security Administration (SSA) for months to get the amount reduced to what I actually owed, $5,317.20. I began repaying them in monthly installments in April, 2012.

Unbelievably, after another severe depression relapse, this whole situation repeated itself. I was disabled again and received SSDI benefits from late 2013 through early 2014. Again, despite notifying the SSA of my return to work, monthly checks continued to arrive for a couple of months.

This time the SSA demanded repayment of $11,101.60, and they wanted the money within 30 days! I love that part. Another battle ensued. My social worker and I wasted multiple hours compiling documentation, making copies, filling out forms, and making phone calls. Months later the amount owed was again significantly, and correctly, reduced. As I had saved the overpayments, this time I was able to immediately repay the $2,267.30 I actually owed.

This past fall, I received disability benefits for 3 months while out of work due to my depression. I returned to gainful employment in December, 2015, and had my benefits stopped immediately. My social worker went directly to the local Social Security office to notify them this time, and they finally got it right.

Unfortunately, the fact they finally got it right and stopped my monthly payment on time did not stop the SSA from trying to get more money from me. First I received a letter demanding repayment of almost $1,900. After proving I didn't owe that money, I received a letter stating I owed them $104.90. After proving that they actually owed me $104.90 (I'm not holding my breath) it seemed the matter was dropped. I heard nothing more for 2 months.

The silence ended in mid-February. In a letter dated 02/17/16, I was reminded I owed the SSA $104.90. More phone calls... On February 25th, I received a letter which stated, "As we told you in our prior letter," a phantom prior letter I never received, "you do not have to pay us back the money. Based on this, your current overpayment balance is $0.00." I cautiously breathed a sigh of relief.

Yesterday my social worker and I were joking about my cautious relief. I made some comment to the effect of, "with Social Security you just never know." That was yesterday afternoon. Today I pulled a letter from the Social Security Administration out of my mailbox. They are demanding repayment of $2,506,26. You can't make this shit up.