This morning I was up to my eyeballs in self-pity. My right hip hurt. That was the beginning. I dove into the pot. The thing about self-pity is once it starts, the end-point is limitless. Like compound interest on your high-rate credit card, the pitiful possibilities are exponentially vast. The pity was blinding me in no time at all.

My hip hurt. Therefore I re-tore my labrum--the hip injury which has already twice been surgically repaired. Therefore I will not be able to run this Saturday. Therefore I will have failed to attain a goal for which I prepared with 15 weeks of committed work. In addition, my hip can't be repaired again. Therefore I am facing the end of my running career. Therefore I will lose a huge piece of my identity and joy. Therefore life will lose meaning and purpose. Therefore I will get fat and lazy. Therefore I will lose my running community friends. Therefore I will be isolated and lonely. Therefore my depression will get worse. Therefore I will drink again. Therefore I will end up a sad, lonely, pathetic woman without a purpose to live!

WHEW! And I only gave you the shortened version of one of my scenarios. Pretty impressive, huh? Each poor-me scenario began at the same place--my hip hurt, the only reality contained within each imagined path. I had scenarios tracing backward, literally years into my past--a self-pity connect-the-dots starting and ending with my hip hurting today. And I had scenes projecting forward, like the one above, which moved me from a sore hip to the gutter in no time at all. What can I say, left unchecked I have a very active brain!

Sitting here now, after performing some PT techniques on myself and then swimming a mile, it amazes me how hyper-defeated my self-pity thinking can be. I have the knowledge and skills to get myself out of that icky pity pot, but today there I sat, soaking in the mire and the muck. While sopping up those mucky thoughts, I was aware I was there. I knew it was a dark, dirty place for my brain to be, but I floundered there anyway. Despite myself, I was no match for the pity pot.

Poor me. Poor me.


photo courtesy Daphne Barnett