STOP THE WORLD! I want to get OFF!

Everything feels like it is happening too fast!
Or it is supposed to be happening too soon!
I don't feel like I have time to prepare for anything!
Yet, that may not be reality!
But it doesn't matter if it is reality or not, does it?
Because it still IS!

Stop the world! I want to get off!
I need a break!
And yet, didn't I just have a break?
Yes...so why wasn't that enough?
How much of a break do I need?
And does it make any sense that one of my main stressors today is that I've been offered another break?
A week in Colorado, in the mountains, at a family cabin, with people I love...
And I'm complaining?
How pathetic is that?
How can this opportunity cause more stress?

WHAT AM I AFRAID OF?
Why do I feel so overwhelmed, rushed, and inadequate?
Why must another opportunity cause so much stress that I'm actually thinking I may not go!
Every chance I get raises more questions I can't adequately answer, prioritize, or ignore!
So much to do. So much to do.
It feels like too much to do. Too many decisions to make...
And I can't seem to slow it down.
My brain can't keep track of it all, and I don't know which end is up!

What do I do first?
Is this more important than that?
What about the other thing?
When will that fit in?
If I do this, and that, and that; will I have time to do the other?
Or will I just end up with more on my list?

That's what seems to happen. One thing sprouts into many more things.
Instead of being finished, I've only opened another can of worms.
And my list grows.
And my brain can't keep up.
And I can't figure out what's important and what's not?
And I'm afraid of this, and I'm afraid of that.
And I'm afraid to say no because I feel I should be able to handle it.
And I'm afraid to ask for time away because I feel I'm already not doing as much as "normal" people anyway.
And I can't seem to get anything done even when the time appears, which has to be one of the most frustrating things of all!!
What is wrong with me?

Stop the world! I want to get off!
Of course, then what would I do?
I'm afraid I don't know the answer to that either...
HELP!

Please help.