Ten years. Gone. Finished. Over. It's now been one decade since depression stole the life I once had, shredded it, and threw it away. It's my own, personal lost decade. I could spend the rest of this post lamenting everything I've lost--spouse, friends, home, job, financial security, opportunity--but lamenting the losses won't bring them back. And I've already spent plenty of time lamenting over the past ten years. (Including time earlier this month...) Suffice it to say that depression, like any other major illness, is a life altering event.

My life has certainly been altered. I was so sick in those early years, I don't know how I made it to this point. I couldn't do anything, take care of anything, or sustain a relationship. My head was sunk in a morass so dark and thick, death felt like my only option. Fortunately, I failed at that, too.

At some point a few years into my lost decade, the drinking began. Drinking worked where nothing else would. It numbed me. It stole me away from my barely tolerable reality. It was a miracle. Unfortunately, the miracle cure quickly became its own separate problem.

Help, fortunately, was something I was lucky to get and willing to accept. An inpatient DBT program, outpatient DBT groups, and years of AA have taught me life skills to deal with people, places, and things (including my illness). Medications have been tweaked, and tweaked, and tweaked again. Numerous doctors, psychologists, social workers, sponsors, friends, family and patients have helped me find a level of stability I never thought possible just 5 years ago.

I would never wish this devastating illness on anyone. Yet because of depression and alcoholism, I have reinvented myself. I look nothing today like I did 10 years ago. In almost every way, I'm actually a better, kinder, more responsible, harder working, more humble and grateful person than I used to be. Is it possible to grieve the loss of a life I will never know while simultaneously feeling grateful for the difficult, painful path I've been given? I think so.

It's been ten years. One decade. No, I would not want to re-live this decade. But today, on a day when my mood is low and my thoughts are still off, I have to look for the gratitude. I have to, or I will not survive. Ten years is a long, long time. Here's hoping year 11 is the best one yet.