I would love to begin this post by reporting that things are much improved around here. Unfortunately, I can't. I'm still feeling very, very low. I don't know why. I've stopped trying to figure it out. It is what it is. And I'm trying to move from one moment to the next as gracefully as possible.

My mother is here. She's been making me soups and freezing them. She also helped me sort through my bills and get my tax information gathered together. It's been good having her here. It's nice to have another person in my home. It makes life a little less lonely right now.

I returned to work on Monday. I've been working 4-5 hours every other day. I feel overwhelmed and incompetent at work. I think I'm doing an okay job, but I don't feel okay. I know I've done better at other times. My boss has been incredibly accommodating, and she's not pressuring me at all. But I put pressure on myself--pressure to work faster, pressure to work more efficiently, and pressure to work more hours. I feel bad leaving so much of the work for my boss. She's pulling more than her weight, and I feel guilty about that.

I'm actually in the process of deciding whether to keep my job or not. One option I have is to take disability. For the life of me, I can't make a decision about what to do. There are pros and cons to working, and there are pros and cons to taking disability (I would still work intermittently while on disability). My mom thinks I'm rushing back into regular work too soon. But mom is the only one willing to provide an opinion. Members of my treatment team are willing to discuss it, but none of them are willing to provide an opinion, so the decision is up to me. I value work, which is why I've gone back, but there are also valid reasons not to work. At this point, I'm hoping the decision will become clear as I move from one moment to the next.

I'm moving from moment to moment as gracefully as I can, but, damn, I wish I felt better! Unfortunately, I don't. It is what it is. All I can do, all I've been doing, is move forward one day at a time. I'm doing the best I can. I appreciate the support I've received here. It really is helpful knowing some of you understand. Thank you for all of your feedback and encouragement. I'll keep going if you will.