I can't believe we are already into September! What happened to the summer? It seems like only yesterday I was blabbering on about my upcoming triathlon and swimming dilemma. That's already more than two months ago! Then there was my dip into the darkness in July. Thankfully that didn't last too long. August saw me take three solid weeks off from any kind of training. Not great, because I'm having a really difficult time getting started again! And now it's September. Wow. Time flies.

Like I said, I'm having a lot of trouble getting back into any kind of exercise routine. I'm proving, once again, that I can't just run, bike or swim for the heck of it. I need a goal. I need to be training for something. That's just the way I'm wired, I guess.

So I'm looking for a goal. It will soon be too cold to bike or swim outside, therefore a triathlon is not a great option. Training for a marathon is the better choice. Of course, any late fall or winter marathon will have to be out of state, as the Minnesota racing season pretty much ends at Halloween. Earlier this summer, I had a plan to run with a whole group of Minnesotans in North Carolina in early November. I let go of that plan when my basement renovation became way more expensive than anticipated. But I do need a goal...

I figure I might have some money again by December, so I searched online for December marathons. There are a few good ones out there. I focused on the ones which would be easy (and therefore less expensive) to travel to. That left me with Dallas and a few others. I've heard good things about the Dallas marathon, so I'm tentatively making that my goal. Tentatively... Tomorrow, I'm going to sit down and make a training schedule. I'll evaluate how I'm doing at the end of September before I make a more definitive decision.

I really hope I can get off my butt and get out the door once I have a goal and a schedule in front of me. Of course, you'll be the first to know if I'm succeeding or failing. Wish me luck.