It's been a rough week around here. I was already sliding a bit when I got the news Monday about my job. That sent me into an immediate tailspin which shook my faith in recovery. For three days, I was so low I barely moved. Accomplishing anything was a monumental feat. It's been one of those root-rattling depressive episodes, and I've been feeling totally unhinged.

Feeling low, unhinged, crazy...I hate it. These episodes rudely remind me of my illness. I have a chronic condition of mind and body, and it can be debilitating. It has been debilitating. And I hate the reminder. But today is a new day, and so far, I feel a tiny bit better. Yet I don't know what to expect. Yesterday began better, too, but eventually the darkness enveloped me again. It was tough.

Despite the darkness, at least yesterday I was able to push through a bit. In the morning, my psychiatrist and I set a goal of accomplishing just two things during the day. I went one better and accomplished three.

It may seem bizarre, but one of the things I accomplished was getting out for a run. It was a priority. I barely got off the sofa on Wednesday. I needed to get out, and I needed to get Puck out, too. So we made it. Yes, it took the life out of me temporarily, but ultimately I think it helped. It was a major accomplishment.

That accomplishment set up the next. Before I crashed after my run, I made some phone calls. There were two promising job opportunities out there. I called about both. I sent resumes to both. I'm interviewing for one of the opportunities next week and will likely interview for the other job before the end of the month. I'm not sure I could have accomplished making those connections if I hadn't gone for my run. I'm grateful I was able to get out the door.

I'm praying today for energy despite feeling so low. I have accomplishments yet to achieve. I have two patients, possibly three, to see. I'm hoping for two. I'd like to get on my bike for a short, indoor ride. My legs are sore from yesterday's effort. And I'll call my sponsor to check in. That's what I'm hoping for today.

It's good for me to have a plan. I've always been motivated by goals. But I'm also aware my body, my brain, my illness may not allow for all I'd like to achieve. I'll try to be okay with that, too. But please, God, grant me a reprieve from feeling so low. I've got more plans to make and more goals to achieve. I hope.