It is the middle of the night. I awoke around 3:30 AM, and it is now 4:35 AM. I've been ruminating. Ruminating, in case you were unaware, is not conducive to sleep. Even Jet is looking at me with tired eyes, not bothering to get up, wondering what the hell I'm doing. I'm ruminating. Writing, I hope, will be the cure.

I got out of the hospital yesterday morning. It was snowing beautiful, fluffy snow, as it had been all morning. I went home briefly, tried to start my snowblower, but despite long distance help from my step-father via texted photos and phone calls, I had no luck. I pulled the snowblower back in the garage and ran off to my AA meeting instead. I thought a little wisdom and serenity time couldn't hurt so soon after discharge. It didn't.

Returning home, and after multiple attempts to start the snow blower, my friend Taylor arrived and started it for me. I now know the trick. Shouldn't be a problem from here on out. Taylor had arrived to return my mail. He kept an eye on my house and collected my mail over the last 10 days. It took me a few days, mail undoubtedly piling up in my mailbox and house appearing very empty, but I finally called Taylor from the hospital and asked for his assistance. He seemed genuinely pleased to be asked and took care of things for me. As a result, I didn't have to worry about my house while I was in the hospital. I guess that's what friends do for each other, huh?

I'm at my friend Wendy's house right now. After clearing the snow from my driveway and sidewalks, unpacking from my hospital stay, and organizing a few overdue projects in my house, I came here last evening to spend the night. Wendy and her family took good care of Jet while I was gone, and he and I had a delightful reunion. We took a cold, snowy walk under the full moon together, in order to release some of his excitement, and I didn't mind one bit. It was also nice to be back in Wendy's home with her active family. Normalcy felt good.

I've got some busy days ahead. I will have an 1.5 hour intake in a few hours for the outpatient mood disorders program I referred to a couple days ago. If the intake goes well, I will be beginning an eight hour per day, two week, intensive outpatient program at some point in the near future. That should keep me very busy, and structured, for awhile. The structure will be good, although I am a bit concerned about it being too much. I hope I can keep up with the rest of my life while participating.

That pretty much covers my rumination for now. I'm going to try to get a little bit of sleep before dawn. I need sleep or I don't function terribly well. It's nice to be here, typing from a bedroom rather than from an inpatient psychiatry unit. I'm going to do my best to make this recent admission my last admission and get back to my life. As usual, I'll let you know how that goes.