I used to really look forward to tapering for my marathons. I think that must have been when I was less experienced. I mean, what's not to love about slowly decreasing my running mileage over a period of three weeks? You'd think I'd feel rested and fresh by week three. Well, this is week three of my taper, and I feel like crud! Fortunately, I've learned from my experience. Crud is normal.

Yep, feeling like crud in the final days before a marathon is fairly normal for me, and I dislike it very much! I feel tired, and heavy, and slow. My legs ache, are as heavy as lead, and I swear I've gained 10 pounds. Despite running less, and as of this week, no longer lifting weights, my body feels fatigued. Even stranger, I tire easily, at work and at home. I just want to take a nap. It's weird, but it's normal.

I've been through this at least 21 times before. Over the last three weeks, I've gone from running over 50 miles a week and aggressively lifting weights to barely running and not lifting weights at all, yet I feel weary and dense. Thankfully, it will all be over soon. In 4 days I'll be on the starting line. I can't wait.

I can't wait to run. It's hard to know if I'm prepared when I feel like this. Certainly I don't feel prepared right now. I need to constantly reassure myself. I know I've done the training. I've run the speed workouts, the long runs, and all the miles in between. I've pressed, swung, and lifted kettlebells to condition my muscles, and I've further strengthened my core with suspension training. I put in the time needed. I can't allow myself to fret about feeling crappy. Soon it will end.

The only thing left to do now is wait. I've packed my bag, although I'm sure I'll check it again. I've lined up the dog-sitter. I've planned my meals, my clothing, and my race nutrition. I'll leave Thursday morning for the 3.5 hour drive north.

I'm going to spend some time with my family before Saturday's race. It's always nice to run Grandmas, as some of my family, including two of my young nephews, are usually able to watch. Hopefully, the weather will cooperate. And I hope my fatigue and heaviness give way to lightness and speed on race day. We shall see.