As we say here in Minnesota, "Uff-da!" It was another tough day out there on the roads. As predicted, the weather was not conducive to running a good marathon yesterday. The temp at the start was reasonable, but the sun came out from behind the clouds just as the starter fired his pistol. The temperature began its precipitous climb. By the time I finished, the temperature was nearing 90 degrees. In addition, winds averaging 15-20+ miles per hour throughout the race made for a tough, tough day.

I began the day with what I thought was a reasonable goal. I wanted to run somewhere around a 3:45 (3 hours, 45 minutes). To do that, I needed to average 8 minutes and 35 seconds per mile. Fortunately, there was a 3:45 pace group, so I jumped in with them at the start. Unfortunately, 4 of my first 5 miles were well below 8:35 pace. The pacer, it seemed, went out way too fast. And rather than trusting my watch, not to mention how I felt, I went with him. Dumb. Going out too fast... It is the cardinal sin of marathoning. I know better.

Despite knowing better, my ego got the best of me. I somehow convinced myself I could handle the early pace. On a day when I should have started extra slow, I huffed and puffed up and down the hills over the first seven miles. I hoped I could handle it, but in the back of my mind I knew I was likely going to pay. I felt a little emboldened when the course flattened out around mile eight, and we (the pace group and I) ran a nice steady 8:35-8:40 pace for the next several miles.

I saw my mom and friends at mile 12. I told them I started too fast. They told me I looked great. I hung with the ever-shrinking pace group as long as I could, hoping at least to make it to 16 miles with them. But I faded fast, and at mile 13.2 I screeched to a halt and began to walk. It happened that fast, and it lasted the rest of the race. I walked a little, ran a little, walked a little more, ran a little less. It was hot. It was windy. And I started too fast. No matter what I put into my body, and I put in a lot, it wasn't enough to refuel me. It was a classic crash!

So it was a long day. I focused on finishing. I focused on taking just one more step. I thought about you readers cheering me on. I thought about what I'd write in this post, what lessons could I impart from such a frustrating day. And the lessons are these. Trust your instincts. Know you know what you know, and stick to your plan. Finally, when you make a mistake, it's not the end of the world and by no means is it a reason to quit. By putting one foot in front of the other--sometimes quickly, sometimes slowly--I did finish in 4:05ish. And I am wiser because of it. Hopefully, I won't repeat the same mistakes again.