     Change of plans, the topic on the table for today is taking a back seat after the news of Chester Bennington’s death. This news made me quite sad. He was the lead singer of Linkin Park, a band which was often the soundtrack to my teen years. Chester was the voice of many emotional songs I would cry or scream along to. Songs like “Numb” and “What I’ve Done” were anthems when I was hurting and didn’t know any other way to deal. He sang “In The End” to the inner pain that this depressed teen girl felt. But when it really comes down to it, I did not know Chester Bennington.
Do you?
     Almost immediately after his suspected suicide was made public social media blew up. The same way it does anytime a celebrity takes their own life.  The controversy starts all over again. The comments and posts flood new feeds with everyone and their cats opinion of the situation.

“I have no remorse for people that commit suicide”

“What an awful example to set”

“He probably just overdosed, he was an addict”

“So sad he is going to hell”

“It was only a matter of time, have you heard his music”

     I mean I have seen people post some really awful things, but some of the ones I have read about Chester’s suicide really take the cake. It made me mad. It made me sad. It hurt me. Knowing, being friends with, some of these people posting such hateful and ignorant comments was horrifying. As someone that has tried to kill themselves I wondered is that what they would have said about me? Would the fact that I have a strong faith be meaningless to them, they just assume I’d be condemned to hell? Would they say “oh well it was only a matter of time, have you seen her art?” Would they let the cause of my death overshadow every other thing about me?
     If asked I’m sure anyone would say no. But why is it different with celebrities? Why does everyone care so much about expressing their opinion when one losses their battle with depression, addiction, and other hurts? I truly do not understand. We don’t know them, we don’t know how they are feeling, or why. Sure there is a lot of speculation. However it’s not our place as complete strangers to judge them.
     Sure I am sad Chester Bennington is gone. I loved his voice and was a big fan of Linkin Park. And even with struggles of my own, I have no idea how he was feeling. I will never know what he was thinking or what pushed him over that edge. I am sad he took his life, I wish he had found a better alternative. However I know nothing about his faith, I certainly don’t know what he thought would happen upon death. It’s not my place to judge him either way.
     Suicide is hard to understand even when you knew the person intimately well; how us can simply fan’s presume to know anything. It is unfair to his family and friends to have to see or know such nasty posts are being made about someone they love and knew. It can also hurt your friends and maybe even family who have thought about it or attempted. All in all, it does no one any good. My mom always had a simple rule, “if you can’t say something nice, don’t say anything at all”. I really wish the internet followed this rule sometimes. You are free to have whatever opinion you want about Chester’s death, but social media is not the place to stick it. At least in my opinion.
      Please note I DO NOT condone suicide even though I have my own past attempt. (And yes I know that may sound hypocritical. But if you broke your arm so bad you wished they would just cut it off you wouldn’t recommend anyone else to go break their arm either. Same super simplified, general logic)

Moral of today’s rant: If you can’t post something nice, don’t post anything. Think about who sees your posts. Don’t judge anyone’s suicide, celebrity or not, you will never know exactly how they felt.

~Samantha Lou


*My prayers go out to Chester Bennington’s wife and children, as well as his family and friends in this time of loss. And thank you Chester for making my emo-teen years that little bit more bearable* 