It's funny. When things are going well, I don't feel I have much to write about. It's the same way with my art. I don't create anything worthwhile when I'm doing fine. I think my creative brain works much better when I feel like crap. Is that weird?

So I'm not sure what to say today. I figure you've got to be bored with all the triathlon training. Puck hasn't changed. Not much to say about him. The new job is still a few weeks away, so there's nothing to report on that front. My life is rolling along--not too fast, not too slow. It feels just about right, and I'm feeling quite the same. Que the sappy, Little House on the Prairie music now...

That being said, here's the latest scoop:

I'm sitting here drinking my coffee contemplating my day. I'm feeling yesterday's 2 hour workout in which I swam 2400 yards, hopped, ran, and panted through the strength circuit, pushed and pulled through resistance training, and finally grunted out the abdominal circuit. Boy was I tired afterward! I could barely keep my eyes open once I returned home. After napping, I did accomplish some ancient items on my to-do-list. Laundry, vacuuming, and even washing my floors are now crossed off. It's nice to be sitting in a relatively clean house this morning. It even seems as if my coffee tastes better.

Today I've got a 70 minute bike ride followed by a 35 minute run. It's called a brick workout. I'm hoping it warms up enough to take my tri bike out and ride on some real roads. The sun is coming up and the sky is clear, so things are looking good right now.

Other than that, I'll have a fairly routine Sunday. I'm expecting a friend to come over to bid on a new patio for the backyard. I'd like to build a very low to the ground wooden deck out there. I hope I can afford whatever price he provides. I'm still waiting on rebuilding my basement. I've been waiting for more than two years! Every time I think I have someone lined up, they don't show up. It's been frustrating trying to get someone in here to do the work for a reasonable price. At this point, I'd offer the work to anyone who could get it done! After all, my exercise room will be down there! Hopefully, things will come together now that spring is on the way.

Speaking of spring, the sun is now shining warmly on my face. I'd better finish my coffee and get going. Have a great day!