Hellooo…..it’s meee….. Haha okay sorry, I had to start with Adele because the setup was too perfect. This is the first time I’ve ever done a blog and it took me awhile to think about why I wanted to create one and what I wanted to post about. Most people blog about their lives and the trips they take as a way to keep their family and friends updated on their lives. I think that’s awesome! But I didn’t want to do that… Unless I go on a trip with Ellen DeGeneres because that is POST WORTHY!! 
I wanted to turn my blog into something that could potentially help people, even if it’s only one person: it’s worth it. My angle is living with depression, anxiety and an alcohol addiction. Key word there- LIVING. I am living with it, which means it’s something I have to deal with all day, every day, even when 90% of the time it’s unbearable. There are TONS of people battling these same things every day and even if you aren’t, you’ve probably had at least one thing happen in your lifetime that has put you down in the dumps for a while. SO- I am going to take you through my day to day life and show everyone how I deal with depression, anxiety and addiction.
The title of my blog is “Depression is Awesome.” Clearly depression, anxiety and an alcohol addiction is NOT awesome BUT- if you are someone suffering from these things or are just having a really bad day, month or year, then you have such an amazing advantage in this world and you don’t even know it! Am I crazy? Maybe. But hear me out ☺ Because you have first hand experience with these struggles, you have the power to help and save pretty much anyone your heart desires. Whether it’s people struggling with the same thing as you or something completely different- you are the one who can relate and you are the one who can put yourself in their shoes because YOU are the one who has been there. You have felt as low as anyone in this world can possibly feel. You have maybe contemplated taking your own life because that is what depression, anxiety and addiction will do to someone. No matter how much other people want to help, there is not much they can say because they don’t suffer from the same things. YOU are the one who was handed this struggle and it totally sucks, but it’s YOUR job to find a way to live with it and it’s YOUR job to bring up the people around you because you might be the ONLY one who can help.
It’s my job as well, that’s why I started this blog- Here are a few things I want to focus on that have helped me in the past...
My motto- if you’re upset about anything…LAUGH. Laugh, laugh, laugh. It’s impossible to laugh too much. I’m going to have a video portion where I post videos of all the things I do during the day to keep myself laughing. Pulling pranks on my coworkers is my favorite so you might see that a lot. Stay tuned. 
Another thing- Find a hobby. As much as I’d love to make beer pong my hobby, that won’t do. So if that is yours, find something else. Rolling a joint into the shape of a swan doesn’t count either (I actually knew someone who could do that-IT WAS NUTS) 
My main hobby is singing. I LOVE to write songs and produce music videos of original songs and covers. So I will be posting videos from time to time with my songs!! (If you YouTube Rachel Wunderli you will be able to find all the ones I have so far) ☺ However, producing can get freaking expensive so prepare for some homemade videos that are poorly made but still FLIPPING AWESOME.
I also love to cook! Here is the problem- I work full time and don’t get home until 6:30pm, so at that point if I’m not on the verge of a mental breakdown or a liquor store run, all I want to do is binge watch my favorite Netflix show (currently Vampire Diaries). It’s hard to get that motivation so I use my husband with that one. He loves when I cook so I convince myself that if I’m not going to do it for me, DO IT FOR HIM. (Ladies- there are other things you can do for your man as well if you know what I’m sayin…) I will be posting awesome recipes that are cheap, easy AND healthy---- TRIPLE WHAMMYYYYY!!! *Eating healthy also helps a ton with depression.
The gym. Someone should create a restaurant called “The Gym” so that when you tell your fam you’re going to “the gym” they’ll envy you, when really you’re just going to shove your face with cheese fries. But in all seriousness- the BEST way you can self-medicate is by exercising. I love the gym even though it’s SO hard to get my butt off the couch once you’re finally home from a long day at work. Do some home workouts. All you need is about 30 minutes a day. I’ll be taking you on my journey to a six pack. I’ve never had a six pack but wouldn’t that be nice?! I’m a skinny person but all my fat goes right to my gut so wearing a swimsuit is not flattering. Everyone has something they hate about their body but the good news is- you can fix it! I’ll be posting workouts and meal preps that I do and I’ll be tracking the progress with my camera ☺
Next- get selfless. Ask a family member once a week if they need help with something, bring a neighbor dinner, look into local charity projects, etc. I will post ideas as I do them- feel free to copy ☺
Lastly (for now)—get cocky. THAT’S RIGHT! Get cocky. You’re hot. OWN IT. I prided myself on never posting a selfie and just last week I posted my first one because ya know what? Sometimes selfies are necessary! It’s nice to get that reassurance from random strangers that you look GREAT. Alright I’m not suggesting to start a selfie-filled Instagram, but do something that makes you feel good about yourself! Get dressed up and go out with your friends. Find a local photographer who isn’t super expensive and do a fun photo shoot just for the hell of it! Throw a party at your house and make dressing up mandatory because I am a firm believer that getting ready helps everyone feel better about themselves.


So to wrap up my goals on how to LIVE with depression, anxiety and/or addiction- 


Laugh. Get a hobby. Get healthy/fit! Be selfless. And get cocky ☺