I registered for the 2012 Boston Marathon today. I was worried the race would fill before I got a chance to register, but thankfully, I got in. I can't wait to go back to Boston next April. I've got a bone to pick with that race. It was the toughest and slowest marathon I ran this past year. I'd like spend more time running and less time walking next time.

Speaking of running, I haven't done a lick of it since Saturday. I've only run twice since my last marathon 3 weeks ago. My knee is not responding to the rest, ice, or ultrasound. It's better, but I can't run without pain, so I'm not running. I'm pretty sure my lateral meniscus is torn. That's the cartilage between the bones on the outside of my knee. I see my orthopedic doctor in 10 days, and I think we may be discussing surgery. But we'll see. Maybe things will yet improve on their own.

I've been training hard despite not being able to run. I've been swimming, biking and lifting weights. I feel good. I don't think I've lost a lot of fitness, but time away from running always hurts running performance. I'm still holding out hope of completing The Twin Cities Marathon in a few weeks, even if I have to walk most of it. That may not make sense to my non-running readers, but I love this event and I'd like to finish it. I hate signing up and not showing up. Of course, I won't do it if it means I'll do major damage. I'll likely decide after discussing it with my doctor next week.

I've been busy sprucing up my home and getting ready for D to come visit. He'll arrive Friday morning for the weekend. I'm really looking forward to seeing him. I'm also anxious for him to meet Bill and Cindy. They are my closest friends and a huge part of my life. He needs to know who they are. We are having dinner with them one night this weekend. I can't wait. I'm sure it will be fun.

Well, I think my kitchen floor has dried, so it's time for me to move onward. I'll sign off for now with best wishes for a good night and a better tomorrow. Thanks for reading, my friends.