It was kind of a big week around here. Seven days ago I ran my first race in 23 months, 7 days, and it went well. I was thrilled to be back racing. I was happy with the result. And I was grateful to do it without re-injuring my Achilles. It was a long, long time coming. I'm so glad I was able to persevere.

On Thursday, I jumped out of an airplane from 13,000 feet, and fell through the air at 125 miles per hour for 60 seconds, before floating back to earth. The experience was more amazing than I can put into words. It was everything I had hoped for and so much more!

I've wanted to skydive since I was 7 years old. It was a bucket list item, but I can honestly say I haven't completely crossed it off the list. I will definitely do it again! And if I can swing it, I plan to go through the training to jump on my own. I did add a link to the video of my jump at the end of my previous post. I've watched it, and re-lived the experience, about 50 times myself. I rarely give advice here, but if you've ever considered jumping, just do it! You won't regret it.

My seven day stretch of big events ended today with a 20 mile training run. It was my first 20-miler in 2 years. It wasn't one of my best. It was, actually, really hard. I even considered cutting it short at 10.5 miles. I worked a lot of hours this week, including almost 9 yesterday, and I think my legs were tired. Nevertheless, I pulled out my perseverance card and played it. I kept going.

It took me almost 3 hours and 40 minutes to get back home, including about 8 pit stops or water stops for both Jet and I, but my actual running time was only 3 hours, which is 9 minutes per mile, so I'm satisfied. I'm glad I continued running even though it wasn't easy.

Life, like running, isn't always easy. Don't we all know that? As simplistic as that sounds, I do think my experiences hanging tough in training help me hang tough when faced with life's challenges, too, whether the challenges come from my work, my health, my finances or my illness.

Speaking of my illness, my mood has improved significantly. The med changes we made a couple of weeks ago have certainly made a difference. Racing, jumping out of an airplane, and running 20 miles probably helped a bit, too. It was kind of a big, successful week around here. And I had fun. How cool is that? Carry on, my friends.