Ever have one of those days where the past smacks you in the face over and over again? I created one of those days today. I've been missing some important items for a few years, and I set out to find them today. Why have I been missing things? As I've remarked here previously, I had ECT treatments for my treatment-resistant depression. As a result, I lost my memory--totally--and therefore lost a few years of my life. I moved into this house right in the middle of that lost time period.

Today, I was looking for my marathon and track medals (for important reasons I won't get into here). I have 4 beautiful medals (3 gold and a bronze) from a 2002 international track meet in Sydney, Australia. Had no idea where they were, but I figured they were probably with my 7 marathon medals, which were also missing.

I was also searching for my wedding ring. It's true, I am no longer married, but that ring represents a beautiful time in my life. Besides, we designed them and had a jeweler hand craft them for our wedding. It had been so long since I had seen it, I was really afraid I might have accidentally thrown it away. In the end, I found all of the above, but I had to do a lot of digging to get there.

The digging became the problem. In the process of searching through my bedroom, I emptied some drawers containing lots of old writing and recovery stuff. There were folders full of crap from outpatient treatment, Dialectical Behavior Therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, 12-step work, and multiple hospitalizations. The journal containing one of my suicide notes was under some books. I unearthed pictures of friends who used to be close but are now distant (ouch), family photos from relatives I no longer hear from, and even a picture of an old college flame. Ancient watches, jewelry, cards, and notes...everything meant something. Everything reminded me, usually painfully so, of a different time in my life. It was amazing. Even old, broken watches instantly transported me back to the days each watch dressed my wrist. It was an exhausting trip down memory lane. Divergent, wide-ranging feelings crowded my soul.

As if competing for supremacy, those multiple mixed-up feelings threatened to overwhelm me throughout the day. Sadness, hurt, disappointment, anger, loss, grief, gratitude, and cheer--each took center stage at one point or another. Deciding what to keep and what to throw also caused internal conflict. By the time I found what I was looking for I felt battered and bruised from the inside out. Yet, I also felt relieved.

Cleaning out some of the "trash" from the past, whether it was a sock, a key, a card, a piece of writing, or an entire program's folder, felt healing. Although reading some of my previous troubled writing was difficult, it also healed me. I felt grateful to no longer be in such a painful space. I was grateful for the difference between then and now. It reaffirmed the work I'd done and reinforced that I had improved. Some of the writing even filled in pieces of my lost years, which apparently were quite painful and filled with drink. It was quite clear, I didn't want to live.

In some ways, I'm amazed to be sitting here today feeling so different. Though not gone, my depression is different. Suicide, once a daily contemplation, now enters only occasionally, and it rarely feels like an option. Today, my writing reveals more control, less desperation and hopelessness. I am less a victim of a cruel, cruel world today. I am more willing to take responsibility for my care. Back then, I was certain I was doomed. There was no light ever coming my way. Today, I'm more accepting of the lows. I have more faith they will pass. And while I still don't wish depression on anyone, while depression still stops me in my tracks, I feel less helpless and more willing to do what I can within its temporary limits.

After my difficult trip through the past, it was nice to see I'd improved. Today, because of the work I've done and the help I've received, my life is better and easier. I am more functional. I am more accepting of myself and others. I've learned to take responsibility for my actions. I'm more tolerant, and I am significantly more spiritual. I'm not perfect, but now I'm okay with that. And I have gratitude today. I never had that in the past. Being able to function today was an example of these changes. I continued functioning despite a myriad of painful feelings and memories without hurting myself, lashing out at someone else, self-medicating or sleeping. That is not only an improvement, it's a miracle.

Thank you: D.E., K.L., A.A., Kim, Cindy and Bill, Mom and Bruce, running, and Puck. Thank you. I am so grateful to all of you.