I recognized his lackadaisical stride and hunched shoulders despite my distant position atop the grandstand. Zoom in with the camera--yup, definitely B., the young man I've mentored since he was sixteen. He's 18 now, and the sight of him in his cap and gown brings a surprising tear to my eye. I realize I am beaming the wide, proud smile of a parent, and I chuckle to myself. With no kids of my own, this may be my one-time moment of beaming pride.

I follow his progress all the way to his seat. Thousands of onlookers prohibit him from spotting me in the crowd, and I am sad. I think he trusts that I am there, but I know he'd feel better if he was sure. I wonder if his alcoholic mom even made the one mile trip. I find out later she didn't bother. He says he doesn't care, but deep down I know he's hurt.

He's very sweet with me. His smile as he approaches is perhaps the most relaxed on him I've ever seen. We hug--the first time ever, I believe. A stranger kindly snaps a couple of pictures of us. He thanks me over and over for being there. I tell him I wouldn't have missed it for the world. I feel so honored to be included.

I tell him I'm proud of him. We talk about college and whether he will attend the overnight grad party. As usual, I find myself encouraging him to go, to get out of his comfort zone, and check out the party. He thanks me again, and then quietly thanks me for the past two and a half years. We chuckle as we review all that we've accomplished together. He jokingly says, "When I'm famous, you can say you knew me when I flunked my driver's test." We laugh out loud, and I hesitantly take my leave.

He's going away to college. I pray he will be okay. I'm so proud and yet also sad. I will miss him when he's gone, but if he's willing, I hope never to lose track of him. Our relationship will change, as he will need less assistance from me. Perhaps this is just what it feels like to be a parent--love him and let him go. It's so cliche, but graduations truly are an ending and a beginning, aren't they? Congratulations, B., and good luck!