It's my birthday. Wow, I'm getting old! I remember when I used to think 40 was so old! Now I'm a bit into my 40's...yikes! I am blessed. I have everything I need, but it is a little tough for me to get older. I can't help but think about every year that passes, and what could have been, if not for depression altering my life. I'm grateful to still be a living, active participant in life. But I can't help but feel there is so much more I could be doing.

D and I had a conversation along these lines yesterday. He is a real worker-bee. He is very career oriented and quite successful. He's been working, and working hard, for over 35 years. I, on the other hand, can't seem to work 3 days in a row without having a meltdown. Whereas I used to work full-time, I now manage only part-time employment with success. I've tried working more, but I get overwhelmed, tired, and out of balance very quickly. I want to work more. I'd like to be a whole lot more financially comfortable than I am. I plan to work more. I just don't know when that plan will ever go into effect.

D and I both know this is a major difference in our lives. We discussed it yesterday. I worry he misses out on some of life by spending hours at work. I apologized for some recent comments I'd made which indicated just that. I also explained why I no longer work full-time. I'm sure it is hard for him to understand. I did my best to explain it, but for someone with as strong a work ethic as he has, I know it's probably difficult to comprehend. Regardless, it was a good conversation covering something I think we've both been worried, or at least thinking, about.

We've had a nice time together this weekend. It's been so great seeing him two weekends in a row. It will soon be three weekends in a row, as I'm going to spend Christmas with him and his family next weekend! We've relaxed more and talked more this weekend, and I've been happy.

Last night we spent hours at Bill and Cindy's house for dinner. There were six of us, as my sponsor and her husband joined us for the birthday celebration as well. Bill and Cindy made an amazing, huge prime rib meal. Everything was beautiful. I was so grateful to be surrounded by so much love.

And that's what I need to keep in mind this birthday. Not what I can no longer do, have, or be, but rather what I can do, what I do have, and who I can be. I am blessed. I have a life filled with satisfying work, people I love, activities I enjoy, and a lovable, loyal dog. I have everything I need.