I ran another race this morning. It was a 10 mile trail race at a local park. Most of the race was in the woods. The footing was tricky and the trail had many, many hills, as most trails do. My legs were already tired from my 5 AM weight lifting class yesterday, and as expected the hills really challenged those tired muscles. But I held my own, I'm happy to say.

I've done this race several times, and I always wonder what the hell I'm doing in the middle of it. It is as mentally challenging as it is physically. There are hills interspersed throughout, some very steep, including one just before mile five, at the top of which I couldn't imagine running another one while realizing I still had five more miles to go. Before long I dreaded running down the steep descents as much as the ascents because my thighs were jelly by mile eight. It takes a lot of muscle control to run downhill. I'm happy I didn't fall on my face.

I didn't stick around for the final results, so I don't know if I received an age group award, but I finished just under 1:27:00. That's about an 8 minute, 40 second average per mile. It's not the 8:15 average I ran a couple years ago, but I was quite happy with it.

Based on my last two slow performances at the Boston and Med-City Marathons, I had no idea what to expect of myself today. To run 8:40 pace on this difficult trail was a pleasant surprise. My legs held up better than I thought they would. That gives me a bit of confidence going into Grandmas Marathon, which is now just two weeks from today.

I start tapering for Grandmas in earnest now. I've decided I'm going to take a short break from training after Grandmas. I'll still run, but I won't train. I'll just run some short distances a few days per week, for fun, for a couple of weeks. I think I need the break, mentally and physically, and I'm looking forward to running for the pure joy of it for a bit. After all, I do enjoy and appreciate running, and I don't want it to ever become a chore. While not a chore, today was hard work, but I'm glad I made the effort. It was a good race.