We all have bad days, blah days. Days we don't want to go anywhere or do anything. Days we don't want to socialize at all. Days we would rather just cancel everything and stay in bed. Now don't get me wrong these break days are fine in moderation. After a long week it is normal to want a day to yourself. The problem comes when these days start taking over your life.
     I know how it goes, I let my bad days rule my life and my schedule for a long time. But as I've more recently been trying to make improvements, I am also working to not give in to them so often. However it can be difficult, really, really difficult. As I am writing today’s post I am trying to motivate myself to meet up with some friends tonight.
     Please don't get me wrong, it’s not that I don't want to go. In fact last week when I was invited out I was overjoyed at the idea. Yesterday when we confirmed our plans I could hardly wait! Even this morning I was looking forward to it. Then quite suddenly I wasn't.
Almost instantly my whole mood did a 180*. I only had 3 hours till it was time to go. I got nervous, a bit anxious, but mostly my depression wants to go crawl in bed and sleep. Its not that I changed my mind. Nothing has happened to prevent me from wanting to go. It just happened, my fine day turned in to a down day.
     It didn't surprise me, however. I've been working on my depression, trying to not let it dictate what I do. A pattern I've noticed is that I will be excited to go out, up until right before its time. But I also know that even if I'm feeling down about going, I typically have a lot of fun if I let myself go.
It was never that I don't want to, or thought it wasn't going to be enjoyable. It is the irrational depressive mood or thoughts that make you feel like there's no point in going. It sucks the fun out of things you enjoy. It is frustrating and doesn't always make sense.
     So I try to look at it as rationally as I can through my depression fogged glasses. I know, at multiple points I was excited about going out tonight. I know I enjoy hanging out with these friends. I know we've had good times before. So there is no reason tonight will be any different. Logically I know this. My depression and desire to go crawl under the covers is going to fight me till I get there. But I have faith I will have fun if I just let myself go. If I make the, often difficult choice, to "ignore" my depressive mood to the best of my ability. So I am going to let myself go.
     You should too! Let yourself go to that movie. Let yourself go to that party. Let yourself go out with friends. Let yourself go, even when depression tells you that you shouldn't.
Please understand there is a difference between the irrational depressive thoughts about something you know you enjoy, and being uncomfortable with a situation. To know the difference is important. Like I explained earlier I know I enjoy spending time with these friends, so I know the way I'm feeling is my depression and not the situation. I am not advocating that you do/go or meet with someone/something that makes you all around uncomfortable.
     It can be uncomfortable to push through your depression. Take baby steps, keep trying. I wish I could say it gets easier, if it does I'll let you know. But do your best, let yourself go, don't let your bad days define you.

~Samantha Lou

*Edit- So ya’ll know, I went and had a blast