I should know better. I should know better than to open their discussions and follow their threads. Their rantings are always the same, and they are based on nothing more than their own perceived experience. Yet they present themselves as authorities on the subject. I should know better than to get involved, but today I apparently didn't.

I found a psychology discussion board on Craig's List today. Didn't know they has such a thing, so I opened it up and took a look. Against my better judgement, I opened a thread about psych meds. Bad idea. Rant, rant, rant, rant, rant... If I were to believe any of the crap I read, I should be a.) dead, b.) in tremendous pain, c.)just as crazy as ever, perhaps even more so, or d.) all of the above! Hmmm... I wonder how I've survived these many years?

The rantings were led by a writer who claimed to still be "recovering" from taking psych meds 18 years ago! She complained over and over again about how much pain she's been in ever since taking these meds. Fine. That's her experience, and for her own reasons, she connects her pain to psych meds. Unfortunately, she didn't stop there. She went on with wild claims, presented as fact, about how psych meds effect the body and brain, and why they cause pain and suffering to "anyone" who dares to take them. If it wasn't so irritating, it would have been comical.

Unfortunately, it's not comical because people with these extreme, unsupported views perpetuate the stigma and myths surrounding mental illness. Rantings such as these may keep people from seeking the treatment they need and deserve. They spread fear. It's too bad.

I've said it here before, and now I'll say it again. I would NOT be alive today if I were not taking my meds. My psych meds are no different than my asthma drugs. I probably wouldn't be alive if I weren't taking the asthma drugs either! Pain? Suffering? Craziness? Yup. I've got all of those in spades when I don't take my medication! I'm not going to tell you to take meds. There are a lot of ways to treat mental illness. But for some of us, these meds--instruments of torture if I were to believe the ranters--are an essential piece of healing.