I panicked! Tuesday night, I swam in open water for the first time with about 15 other newbies. Despite being a strong swimmer in the pool, I couldn't keep up with others whose strokes looked no better than mine. In fact, on our last drill, an actual swim in deep water around some buoys, I panicked and had to stop. Needless to say, I've been bitterly disappointed and a bit distraught since then.

I was working on "sighting." That's where you lift your head out of the water to see where you're going. It's quite difficult. It goes against everything I've been taught about proper swim technique, and it's very inefficient. About one quarter of the way through, I lifted my head and took in a big gulp of water. Unfortunately, the water didn't go to my stomach, it went directly down my windpipe, and I couldn't breathe. I tread water and gasped, loudly, for air. Finally after multiple loud, squealing gasps, I caught my breath. But it was too late, panic had set in. I tried to swim again, but I couldn't. I had to flip over onto my back and slowly cut across the course to shore. I was done.

The instructors all said nice things. The other swimmers who initially came to rescue me--that's how desperate my gasping was--said nice things. I think they were worried I was embarrassed. But I wasn't really embarrassed. I was disappointed and scared! How was I going to do this long triathlon for which I had trained so hard? In those few seconds of distress, my fear of deep water was reinforced ten fold! Now I can't get the scene out of my head.

I've spoken to my therapist about it. Like you, she's been following my progress toward this goal, and she's a swimmer. She's helped me re-frame the situation a little bit, but I'm still so, so disappointed and anxious. I'm afraid I've bitten off more than I can chew. I'm having dreams about drowning. It's terrible.

I have a 30 minute swim scheduled today, and I'm going back to the scene of the drama to try again. For now, I think I'll stay in water which is not over my head. But the triathlon course goes out into the middle of this very deep lake--twice! I'm going to have to get over this, or I won't be able to cross triathlon off my bucket list. Any suggestions...I'm all ears!