Happy New Year, everyone! I hope you all rang in the start of 2014 with happiness, serenity and peace. I was actually invited to three different parties. I attended two of them, and then I rang in the New Year at my friend Wendy's house with Wendy, her pre-teen children, their friends, and wine glasses filled with grape juice. It was a very nice evening all the way around.

It was great, and unusual, to have the energy to get dressed up and get out of the house. I was so happy to see running friends I hadn't seen for a very long time and to meet new people through other friends. After all, I've been in and out of the hospital or cooped up at home since mid-September. Being out with others, while totally normal, was quite a unique experience for me.

I felt good while out. I smiled and laughed and participated in conversations. I ate too much, drank too much diet soda, and laughed some more. For the most part, I felt a part of, rather than apart from the crowd. I truly enjoyed myself.

The fact that I found my experiences at both parties so enjoyable made what happened afterward so confusing. I ended the night sitting on the edge of the bed sobbing. Wendy comforted me, as I was overwhelmed with sadness. I also felt angry at this illness. I remember saying, "It's never going to let me go." But coming on the heals of such a fun evening, the sadness and hopelessness was very confusing.

The low mood, lethargy, and hopelessness has unfortunately carried over into today. I'm not sure why this began last night, or why I'm feeling this way now. My best guess has to do with the huge gap between my outside presentation and my internal struggle. I think the dichotomy between how I presented myself to others last night and how I still feel internally is gigantic. Later, sitting quietly and reviewing my evening, I think realizing that difference between my outside and my inside just plain hurt.

I realized I could pull it off for awhile. I could be the person I used to be. I could socialize, be humorous, and present myself confidently. But I am not yet back to being that person. Being out last night highlighted that fact. And that makes me sad.

My brain feels so fragile right now. Even joyful events and feelings seem to take their toll. I accomplished nothing today. I'm hoping to bounce back soon. And I am not letting the sadness take away from the fun I did experience last night. Being out was way better than sitting home. I'm still glad I went.