I'm not sure why, but it's happening with more and more regularity. Brain inflammation, virus, pessimistic outlook, born on a day that ends in Y... I have been getting a barrage of comments lately from concerned people wanting me to know the real cause of depression. You haven't seen most of these comments. They almost always include a link to a page dedicated to their cause, and I rarely publish comments with links such as those.

I value the integrity of my blog. I don't want readers to get confused and think I approve of or endorse most of these sites. It seems commenters who leave links are typically more interested in pushing their favorite site than they are in the post on which they've commented. So to keep my blog mine, I reject most link-laden comments.

But let's talk about this issue. Why are people so concerned that I hear about the real cause of depression? For the record, I believe depression is an organic brain disorder or disease caused by chemical imbalances or other mechanisms of which we are not yet aware. I also think high-tech MRI imaging will soon show differences between the brains of those with depression and those without. This is the kind of depression I have. I also realize there are situational factors which can bring about an episode of depression. Certainly, if I had cancer or MS, I think I might also develop depression. If I broke up with a boyfriend or someone died, I might be more prone to depression. And maybe someday we'll understand if situational depression looks the same in the brain as non-situational depression. That will be a big day!

Could I get depression if I had a virus? Sure, if the virus were significant enough to significantly alter my life. But I don't think the virus necessarily causes the depression. I think the depression results from the debility the virus causes. Those are my opinions based on the scientific facts of which I've learned.

Why am I writing about this? I guess because I'm a little offended by all of the suggestions. To me they smack of the ongoing stigma that surrounds mental illness. Why can't we accept depression as a medical condition? Is it because we can't see it in the lab or on an x-ray? Suggesting that I have brain inflammation or a virus is just about as offensive to me as telling me I don't smile enough. Where is the science? And why would anyone think, after ten years of struggle, I wouldn't have looked into every cause imaginable before accepting my condition? Before I accepted my depression for what it was--a brain disorder or disease--I examined every other facet of my life and health. We found the sleep apnea, but other than that all we proved was that I was incredibly healthy! Unfortunately, my brain is a little off.

Fortunately, my brain and my depression respond well to medication, which only reinforces my belief in an organic medical condition such as screwed up neurotransmitters. It also, like many other illnesses (MS, cancer, HBP), responds well to healthy living and exercise. It doesn't help to smile more. It does help to sleep more. In summary, it acts like a lot of other illnesses--illnesses fortunate enough to show up in a lab or on an image. Hmmm...

I don't know where I'm going with this exactly. I guess I just needed a little rant. As usual, I look forward to hearing what you think, but please, leave your links at home.