I am less than two weeks away from running the Boston Marathon. I'm really looking forward to going now. From a running standpoint, I feel ready. That's really great. I never thought I'd be able to say that in January when running was so slow and tough, and I was feeling so heavy.I'm still in the process of losing the depression weight. I've lost at least 7 pounds since January, and that's made a big difference in my running. It's gotten easier and easier to run faster and faster over the months of training. I'm anxious to see what my body will do on marathon day, April 21st.

I'm also anxious to see my boyfriend, D. We haven't seen each other in at least 6 weeks! Too long. He's coming to Boston to watch me run. We're flying separately from our respective states and meeting at the hotel in Boston. I can't wait! I've been missing him a lot lately. We're staying for a few days after the race, too. I lived in Boston for five years, so I'm excited to show him the sites while we spend time together. I'm afraid it might be hard to leave.

Hopefully, when I do come home, I'll have more work options. I'm still trying to get some shifts scheduled so I can get back to my pre-depression-episode life. I will be working tomorrow for the first time in two weeks. I'm worried my improved mood over the past two weeks has simply been the result of not working, which would mean my struggles prior to that were likely the result of going back to work. I hope that was not the case. I'd prefer if it was more of a coincidence. Until I get some consistent shifts again, I guess I won't know for sure. It will be nice to work while feeling better.

And finally, thank you all for your comments on my previous post. I really enjoyed reading your thoughts and appreciated your kind words of support. As so often happens when I write here, I now know I am not at all alone. I hope the comments of others were helpful to the rest of you, too. I'll keep writing in hopes that we all continue moving forward despite our personal battles with this dreadful illness. Carry on, friends.