Hello from Colorado!
So sorry for the abrupt departure from this space. I've been fretting about not being able to write, but here I am finally. I am in a Colorado cabin with my good friends Bill and Cindy. They were generous enough to invite me to their Northern Colorado cliff-side cabin for one week again this year. We spent a week here last year as well. The cabin is on a cliff overlooking a wide meadow with mountains in the distance. It has no electricity nor running water. It's perfect. (I'll post pictures soon.)

We arrived after a hectic run through the airport on Saturday. Our plane was cancelled, but after some fancy footwork we dashed onto an even earlier plane. In fact, I got a seat in first class! That was cool. It was sunny when we arrived, and it's been nothing but sunny and dry ever since. From our cabin, we can sip coffee and watch the sunrise bring the mountains to life. It's peaceful and restful.

The peace and rest have not, however, kept us from adventure. We've played, slept, and played some more. Today we hiked 6 miles in the mountains up to 10,577 feet. Tomorrow we may hike a 13,000 foot mountain. Needless to say, I haven't felt the need to run yet. My quads are tired, but my brain is clear.

My right shoulder is also a bit sore. I shot a 12 gauge shot-gun for the first time yesterday, hence the sore shoulder. Five of us finished off 200 shells shooting clay pigeons. (Otherwise known as trap or skeet shooting) It was a blast--no pun intended. I started off slow. It was tough for me to track a spinning orange disc hurtling through the air. Once I got the hang of it, however, I did pretty well. I finished with a 3 for 3 round. It was very satisfying obliterating that clay disc, reducing it to powder in mid-air, especially when I pretended it was my depression! Very satisfying.

The depression has, in fact, continued to stay at bay. I'm very grateful. I am alive and well here. I'm hoping to write with typical frequency again, but if I miss a few days...well, I'm probably having too much adventure or too much rest. Time for dinner...