You may have noticed I was a bit vague in my last post. I noted that I ran my "long run" despite feeling lower and heavier than I had felt in years. I purposefully didn't mention my run was 15 miles. (Fifteen miles?!? How can you run 15 miles when you say you feel tired, sad, and hopeless? That doesn't make any sense! There's no way a person could do that while feeling as bad as you say you were feeling! So you're either lying, attention-seeking, or both! Or...if you can run 15 miles while feeling so bad, then I can expect my son, daughter, or best friend to do more when they're feeling bad!) And therein lies the dilemma.

My dilemma is sometimes I can do things despite feeling really bad, but that doesn't mean I don't feel bad. However, I understand how difficult that may be for a normie to comprehend. Heck, it's even hard for me to comprehend at times! It just doesn't make sense. Fortunately, I've forced myself out the door often enough to know sometimes my body can do things despite evidence to the contrary. That's why I forced myself out the door on Saturday. I had to trust I'd be able to run despite feeling bad.

I did run. It wasn't pretty at first, but I ran 15 miles and met my goal. I hesitated defining my long run, however, out of fear--fear my symptoms might have been taken less seriously. I hesitated writing about running 15 miles out of fear your symptoms might be taken less seriously. This is the strange, contradictory nature of my depression. Sometimes my mood is okay, but I can't get out of bed. Sometimes my mood is black and hopeless, yet I can run 15 miles?? Yes. And it doesn't mean I didn't feel bad.

Honesty shouldn't be a dilemma. I guess I'm still too concerned with what others think. I realize there are multitudes of providers, families, and friends who would find nonsense in what I reported feeling versus what I accomplished on Saturday. It's a dilemma, but the goal of this blog is to educate others and to support people with mental illness. I don't accomplish either of those goals by leaving out parts of my reality. After all maybe it's your reality, too. To educate and support, I must be honest.

Maybe some of you share my experience? Maybe you can sometimes do things contrary to your mood state. Maybe it baffles you, too. Maybe there are parents, siblings, friends, and perhaps healthcare providers who witness these contradictory acts. Maybe it causes them to question your reality, your story, your experience. I don't want to perpetuate that. My experience supports the contradiction. Sometimes we can do things despite feeling like crap. It doesn't mean we don't feel like crap. Right?