Since my first 20-miler last weekend, I've been enjoying a recovery week. Recovery weeks are notable because I'm scheduled to run fewer miles. For example my long run this weekend will only be 12 miles. The goal of a recovery week is to recoup some energy before going back at it hard.

Unfortunately, despite being a recovery week, I am tired! Yet I'm grateful this has been a lower mileage, less intense week. I don't think I could have gone back to work, even though it was only a few hours, during a high mileage week. I'm tired, and I think it was going back to work which sapped my energy.

I worked twice this week. I worked a couple of hours on Monday, which I wrote about in my previous post, and then worked three hours yesterday. I worked with patients for the first time in over five months yesterday. I was anxious going in. I think I did okay, but I felt very rusty and a little unsure. I didn't like that, but I guess it's to be expected.

When I got home yesterday, I was surprised by my level of fatigue after only three hours of work. I needed to sleep, which I did, and I also needed to run, which I did later. I actually contemplated not running, as I just couldn't shake the tiredness. I decided to run anyway, thinking I'd feel better once I got going, but that didn't materialize. What should have been an easy five mile jaunt was five miles of drudgery instead.

The fatigue has carried over into today. I'm accepting it and working through it by being kind to myself. I got up at my regular time, ran a couple of errands, did some poking around at the thrift store, went for a walk, and then took myself out for a nice lunch. Lunch was so nice, I ordered dinner to go! While I'm enjoying my dinner later, I plan to also watch a movie I've been wanting to see. I'm hoping all this mellow kindness will translate into more energy tomorrow.

Next week begins another high mileage, 20-mile-long-run week. I hope I recoup my energy over the next few days. I'm going to need it. I'll be back at work for a few more hours on Monday.