US Bank Home Mortgage sent me a letter yesterday, and I'm still irritated. Here's the back story. Last month, I decided I would begin paying my mortgage twice per month. Paying it twice per month, I found out, saves a considerable amount of money over the long term. I also decided to pay more than half the total amount due with each payment--more savings for me. I made my first payment to US Home Mortgage on April 10th. The due date is May 1st. The second payment is scheduled to go out April 25th, a full 5 days before the due date.

On April 12th, US Bank Home Mortgage sent me this lovely thank you (Ha!) note:

Dear Mortgagor:

In reviewing your suspense account (my what??), we have received funds in the amount of $xxx.xx. Your total monthly payment is $yyy.yy. Please submit the difference of $zzz.zz in order to credit only your May 01, 2010 payment. This amount does not include any outstanding fees or balances.

Please be reminded (I love that) that if your payment is received more than fifteen days after the due date of your mortgage loan, then your account will be assessed a late charge. Also please be aware, if your account becomes delinquent, then your account may be reported to the credit repositories.

Isn't that nice? It goes on to tell me where I can send the remaining funds due and thanks me for my cooperation.

Here's the response I think I'll send.

Dear US Bank Home Mortgage Payment Processing Department:

In reviewing your letter of April 12, 2010, I have a need to comment. You received $xxx.xx, more than half of my May payment, on April 10, 2010. Please be reminded that April 10th is more than one month in advance of when my payment would be considered late. Therefore, I have more than one month to send you the rest of my payment, which I plan to do prior to May 01, 2010.

Please be reminded, again, that you've been servicing my mortgage loan for over 6 years, and I have never, ever sent you one late payment. In fact, I've gone without groceries more than once in order to fulfill my obligation to you. Also, please be aware, that I will continue to send you two monthly payments from this time forward, both of which will arrive long before my account is in any jeopardy of becoming delinquent.

If your processing center is not set up to allow for bi-monthly payments without generating threatening letters each time less than the full amount due is received, I will have no choice but to refer my business elsewhere. Thank you for your cooperation. If you have any questions regarding this letter, please call me. You have the number.

Sincerely, etta