When last you heard from me, I was in the midst of taking a scheduled running day off. Fatigue and a series of crappy runs had gotten the best of me. That was Tuesday. The unplanned rest did seem to make a difference during my weight training class Wednesday evening. My legs handled the workout just fine. I was pleased.

Thursday dawned optimistically. I got some chores done around my house before meeting with my social worker at 11:00 AM. After eating a light lunch, I laid down to take a brief nap before my scheduled run, five half-mile repeats, which I expected to complete later that afternoon. I was ready and looking forward to getting back on the road.

Unfortunately, my nap never ended. I simply could not shake the sleep from my head. I tried. I got up, more than once, but it took 3 hours of sleeping to finally stay awake for more than a few minutes. I still thought I could run, despite wasting the whole afternoon on my sofa, but it was not to be. As soon as I ate a little bit, it was back to the sofa for me. I slept again, this time for a couple of hours. I awoke just in time to get ready for bed, and despite sleeping away half the day, I slept all night.

I guess I needed the rest, I thought, and I let it go at that. Friday was a scheduled rest day, so I took it. That meant today's run was my only run in the last 6 days. That's a long break in a marathon training schedule, but I accepted it. Apparently, it was meant to be. That being said, I was anxious to run today.

Unfortunately, I had another tougher-than-it-should-have-been run. What a disappointment! Today's villain was fatigue plus GI distress. It took more than 2.5 hours to run 13 miles, a distance which should have taken less than two hours. Fortunately, it wasn't all bad. Around 9 miles I began to feel a bit stronger. That lasted for a little over two miles. Just before mile 12, the fatigue descended once again, and I trudged home.

All in all, I think the rest did help. I feel encouraged that I had at least a few miles of less fatigue and stronger legs. Of course, I wish it would have lasted longer, but it didn't. While struggling through the miles, I decided to contact my doctor and ask her to order some blood work. I'll e-mail her today.

Something feels out of whack. I've been through periods of fatigue many times, but I'm usually able to resolve it with the interventions I've already put in place (multivitamin, rest, improved diet). I wonder if I'm anemic. I hope so! At least then this would make sense, and I would know what I needed to do to fix it!

Until I get some new or different information or something changes, I'm working on accepting where I'm at, doing what I can to stay close to my training schedule, and trying to get as much rest as I can. Sooner or later, something has got to make a difference. I'm going to count on that.