Someone with significant depression told me today that they couldn't relate to my blog because I was doing too well. That made me sad. I'm still sad about it. And I must confess, it is something I've worried about recently. What do I do?

I started this blog to support people with depression and to educate others about depression. When I started this blog I wasn't doing all that well. I was occasionally well, but my depression was ever present. As the years passed, the balance shifted. Now I'm well more often than not. My episodes into the black hole continue, but they are shorter-lived and less frequent. Make no mistake, I'm thrilled about that. It's what I wanted. It's what I worked hard to achieve. And while I'm certain I can still use this blog to educate, can I offer support when those in the black hole can't relate?

I'm sad that those I intend to assist cannot relate to my story, but I understand. I remember being there. I know the only books about depression I ever read are the ones that tell it like it is--the ones that explore the depths, describe their experiences within the black hole, and detail the darkness. I get it. It makes me sad that some can't draw inspiration from where I'm at now, but I totally get it.

Those of you who've been around awhile know I've explored, described and detailed those dark experiences in this blog, but many of those posts are long in the past. One would have to search to find them, but they are here. My hope is writing about how I'm doing now, which is well more often than not, would inspire and/or give hope to some sufferers. But again, I understand how it may have the opposite effect as well. I've been there!

I'm not sure what to do about this. Recently, I contemplated discontinuing my blog for this very reason, but I got a lot of feedback to keep going. I want to help. I want to be a safe haven for fellow sufferers of this illness. I'm sad this person isn't reading, but I'm not sure there's anything I can do.

Realistically, I know I can't be everything for everyone. Realistically, this blog helps me as much or more than it helps you. I don't think it's a coincidence that three years after starting here, I'm doing very well. I thought again today about discontinuing my writing, but I'm going to continue. Many of you have told me I'm making a difference, and I appreciate that feedback. Thank you. I hope I can continue to provide something for someone.