With a 20-miler and a 10-miler scheduled, I was a little apprehensive going into this past weekend. I wasn't sure how my body would physically respond on the heels of the recent dip in my mood. I am happy to report, however, that I had a very good weekend. Physically, I had two really good runs. I felt good. My pace was quicker than previous long runs. And I recovered well. My confidence is rising. I am now looking forward to the Boston Marathon. I'm feeling more and more ready everyday.

Other than running, I also had a pretty good weekend from a mood standpoint. I made the mistake of staying in, alone, all day, after my 20-miler on Saturday, so I was pretty bored and a little low by the evening. A phone call to my boyfriend, D, helped. And I made sure not to do the same thing on Sunday. In fact, I went to my friend Wendy's house Sunday morning, and Jet and I ran from there. When we finished running, we spent some nice time relaxing with Wendy and her family before returning home. The rest of the day went well after that. I definitely need to work on socializing more. It is almost always beneficial to my mood.

I finished my day, yesterday, with a two-hour massage from my friend, Bill. He's a newly minted massage therapist, and he is wonderfully skilled. He kneaded, prodded, and stretched me like I was a pile of Play Dough. And Play Dough is exactly what I felt like by the time he was finished. I came home and slid directly into bed. I haven't had a massage since last summer, and this one, I thought, was timely and deserved. I'm grateful to have a friend with such skilled hands. I'll definitely have to make more time in my future schedule for such pleasant treatment.

Thank you all for your comments on my last post. I hate to admit when my thinking gets screwed up. I guess I feel like it's okay if it happens to you, or you, or you, but not me. I tend to be a little hard on myself, or so I've been told. Your comments helped me feel less crazy and alone. Thanks again. Carry on, Friends.