I had no business running a race today, but I did. It was the local, annual women's 4-miler, and a lot of very fast runners showed up! I decided to run it last night. Although I'm in no shape to race, I'm hoping this race will springboard me into more regular training. It's a get-back-on-track technique I've used in the past with some success. Racing when I'm not prepared also carries some risk, but today I decided the potential positives outweighed the negatives. So I ran a race today.

The primary risk of running today was poor performance. There was the possibility of performing so poorly that I'd feel defeated beyond measure. Fortunately, that didn't happen. I didn't perform great. I didn't perform up to my expectations. In fact, I worked so hard and was in so much agony, I had to hold back tears at the finish line. But in reality, my performance was not poor.

I was out-dueled over the final 1.5 miles by a friend in my age group, and I did feel defeated. That was very frustrating. I usually enjoy such duels whether I win them or not. I usually enjoy the mental games and psychic toughness required to even participate in a duel, but today it was just hard. Today it was just work, and I couldn't wait for it to be over. Nonetheless, I stuck with it.

Sticking it out was definitely an accomplishment. To stick it out I had to put up with a barrage of negative self-talk--lots of "if-onlys..." today. If only my mood hadn't been in the toilet lately. If only I was training more consistently. If only I was lighter and less fatigued. Blah, blah, blah...my brain worked overtime throughout the race! Nevertheless, I held back my finish line tears by reminding myself that running in and of itself was an accomplishment.

And in the end, I didn't run terribly. I ran like someone who hasn't been training regularly. I ran like someone who's felt bad, been tired, and feels heavy. I ran a 30:23 and finished 12th out of 93 runners. I'm trying not to write about how fast I used to run this race... Instead I will say this, "I ran fairly well today."

Despite the pain, I felt good in the end. I've spent much of the rest of this day in bed, wiped out from the effort, but the positives did outweigh the negatives today. I'm happy about that. Hopefully, this will be more than a blip on the map. Hopefully, this race will mark the beginning of feeling better and of running regularly again.