Not much to report. Life is moving along. I watched 15 orientation videos at my new job today. Fortunately, I can access them from home, too, so some of them were viewed from the comfort of my recliner. The sad thing is I'm not even close to being done with the videos yet!

Speaking of computer access, I did spend a couple hours buying and installing a new router for my wireless home network. It was hard to part with the $96.00, especially since the router I was using was only 1.5 years old! I didn't purchase the same brand this time around. Ninety six dollars...the cost of convenience, I guess.

I had two good workouts today. I started my day with a killer cable strengthening class at the gym. I'm going to have sore shoulders and legs tomorrow, I think. This afternoon, I went for a 50 minute run with Puck. My legs were tired, but I'm happy with my training pace these days. I've gotten faster since I began triathlon training. I'm looking forward to my rest day tomorrow.

I'm a little worried about Puck. He was really lagging behind for the last two miles of our 6 mile run on Saturday. He seemed overly tired and/or sore. Later, I figured out he'd worn off the skin between his second and third toes on both of his back feet. I think his gait has been altered since he had both ACL's reconstructed. It's either that, or he's got arthritis in his feet causing him to alter his gait. I don't know, but he's got red raw skin between his toes. I rested him yesterday, and I've been treating the skin with some doggie foot stuff. I also upped his anti-arthritis drug. He's healing, but I'm still concerned.

One of my concerns is leaving him home while I run. It's almost impossible for me to leave without him, and today was no exception. He was raring to go as soon as I donned my running gear. I tried to assist him by smearing some Vaseline between his toes before we left, and I dropped him at home after only 3 miles. Nevertheless, he still lagged behind for the last mile or so. Since he seems to begin lagging only after we turn toward home, it's hard to tell if it's behavioral, or if he really is in pain. I sense a call to the vet in my immediate future.

Well, it's getting late, and I've got a full day of patients (yippee!) and orientation (boo!) tomorrow. If any of you have thoughts about Puck I'd be happy to hear them. Happy to hear any other thoughts, too! Good evening, one and all.