The days are getting noticeably longer up here in the northern United States. Yesterday I could still see across the backyard at 5:00 PM. That wasn't true not so very long ago. Like the days, my mood is inching toward the light, too. It's not been a speedy process, but I think there is hope for brighter days ahead. The wonderful, supportive comments I've recently received here have helped me a great deal. So thank you all for making a difference. Perhaps soon I can again be writing about the pleasant boredom of feeling well.

My motivation to act, unlike my mood, is taking a longer road to the light. I'm still exhausted by everyday events and tasks. Actually, I've been so fatigued, I haven't been attending to most everyday tasks. I'm not sure those without depression can ever comprehend the physical toll it can take on a body. My depression can make it downright impossible to move. While I'm not at that low point anymore, I'm still having trouble taking action.

I've gone from not moving to the point of focusing my limited energy on one task per day, which means on the days I work, that's all I do. I work. I come home. I don't move. I've missed some meetings and other events I planned to attend because they've fallen on days I've recently worked. But I've got to work. I've got to keep the financial stress to a minimum, as that, too, can trigger exacerbation of my illness.

Today my task is laundry. It seems so simple, laundry, but it has taken almost all my energy to get two loads laundered thus far. Physically, I'm so wiped out. After taking one load to the basement and starting it in the machine, I came back upstairs and fell fast asleep on the sofa! This is when I have to remind myself the fatigue is part of my illness. I'm not being lazy. It is what it is, and I'm working within the limits of my depression.

Hopefully those limits are slowly expanding again. I'm anxious to get out of the darkness and into the light. I'm ready to be more active, have more energy, and be a productive participant in my life again. Thank you all for your kind comments recently. You all hold me up more than you'll ever know. Carry on, my friends.