What a busy day! I've been going, going, going. I guess that's a good thing. It means my mood is back to normal, my thoughts are under my control, and for the moment, all is okay in my world. For the moment... Here's the recap.

After sleeping just a bit later than normal this morning, I did some chores around my house, made some phone calls, and prepared some paperwork for my sponsee. Then I jetted off to the gym for two hours of hard work! My triathlon class schedule called for a 60 minute bike ride followed by a strength workout. The strength workout consisted of three parts. First, I did a Kinesis circuit. Kinesis is a series of four machines. On each machine I worked both the upper and lower extremities simultaneously for three minutes. The second part of the workout was abs--a series of 14 exercises done in rapid succession. The third section of our strength workout was (is) the most challenging. It consisted of a series of three blocks of 8-10 exercises. Each exercise was done for 30-60 seconds with a 30 second rest period between blocks. The exercises included things like squat jumps, push-ups, medicine ball lunges, jumping jacks, and sprints of 1/10 mile. Oh. My. God. I thought I was going to die. This is the third time I've done this workout, and it has not yet gotten any easier!

After the gym, and despite feeling like a sweaty bowl of jello, I came home to finish my laundry and meet with my sponsee. She's working on her fourth step--kind of a critical juncture in AA step work, for those of you unfamiliar. We went to an AA meeting after our meeting. Then I rushed off to the grocery store. I hurried through the store in hopes of making it to my friend's house for Lost. I didn't make it. After putting away the groceries I was done. I stayed home.

So here I sit, sleepy and sore, with Lost playing in the background, finishing my day with all of you. I don't always like being so busy, but today was a good day. I think I'm back. I don't think I could have done today if I wasn't.

Grateful to be feeling better. Grateful for the energy to work and workout. Grateful to be sober today. Good night.