when I told people I wanted to start a blog about depression, I often received dubious looks, rolling eyes, and lots of incredulous "why" questions. when I tell people I write a blog about depression, I often get dubious looks, rolling eyes, and lots of incredulous "why" questions.

for the first few months, when I got 1-2 visitors per day, sometimes I wondered "why," too. I knew from my research that the interest and need was out there, but I also knew there were numerous, actually millions, of sites addressing the need. despite my doubts, I persevered and soon began receiving enough visitors that google could actually pick me out of a line-up! and it was google that answered the "why" question.

some of you may not know this, but websites, like mine, are able to track how people find them. it helps us know who our market is and if or how they are getting to us. so, for the last couple months, I have had the privilege and honor to see the search terms used when someone lands on my site.

and it has been heartbreaking.
I didn't anticipate that.

to know why you found me, yet not know if finding my site helped you, supported you, or answered your question has been excruciating at times. too often, I find myself wanting to reach right through my computer to hold your hand, hug you, or just tell you it's going to be okay. I want to know if you are okay, or are you still out there searching?

I want to know. did I help:

you--in China. you landed here after googling: my brain hurts aches depression
I am so sorry. I hope something I wrote made a difference in your day. I am so sorry you hurt. did you find anything here that helped? are you still out there hurting and searching?

you--in the US when you looked for help with: fatigued and weary
I get it. did you find my posts on being so f***ing tired? did it help to know I've been there, too?

you--USA sufferer with: depression intrusive thoughts or
you--with: scary intrusive thinking
within days of my post revealing my own scary thinking, you both found me. I wish I knew if reading my post was relieving for you. I hope so.

you--from far away with the: spiraling down depression
did any of my posts stop your fall? I've been there, too. if I knew you, I'd put out my arms to slow your descent...but a blog doesn't allow that. I hope my words helped.

and finally, all of you--runners from all over the world who've landed here because of: post marathon depression or post Boston Marathon depression or depression after marathon
I'm embarrassed to say this, but I had no idea! I hope the fact that there are a ton of you helps some of you feel less alone. not sure my blog addresses your area of concern, but if you leave me some comments, I'd be happy to start the discussion!

why write a blog about depression?
this is only a sample...