13 Reasons Why - Tape 1, Side A

     To my satisfaction the show starts with this screen saying:

“This Fiction Series covers several difficult issues, including depression and suicide.
If you or anyone you know need help finding support and crisis resources in your area, go to 13reasonswhy.info for more information.”

     So first things first I checked out the site listed. It is a simple page listing the Crisis Text Line, JED Foundation, and the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline under the American listings. It also has resources listed for 58 additional countries you can choose from.  A nice little resource page for anyone who takes the time to look it up.

*Warning Spoiler Alerts Ahead*

     I will try not to get too much in to the details of the plot. My goal is to touch on the themes of the show. The impressions it leaves and feelings it invokes. And of course talk about the ways that depression, suicide, and other important topics are touched on.
     '13 Reasons Why’ wastes no time. It jumps right in to indifferent teens taking selfies with Hannah’s locker memorial.  A locker covered in mostly short impersonal notes. Such as “You were so beautiful”, “Miss you”, “Don’t want you to go…”, and “I miss my Snapchat friend”… My Snapchat friend really???  Can you get any less personal than that? This is followed quickly by a scene in which the students are in class. Ignoring their teachers lecture on what we can safely assume to be suicide prevention resources. Some are sharing their fake pouty faced selfies on social media as others stare blankly at the ceiling . One student even speaks up asking if they can stop talking about “this”, meaning suicide. He continued by saying it had already been a week and he doesn’t want to be reminded of it all the time because it is “depressing”.
     Immediately there is this idea that for the majority of the students this “tragedy” had little effect on them. There is great portrayal of indifference and shallowness. There is even a sense of selfishness; from the girls posting selfies. Making it all about themselves on social media. As well as from the boy that asks if they can stop talking about it because he finds it depressing. Twisting it to make it about his feelings.  I get that feeling of indifference again as the character Courtney tries to halfheartedly comfort Clay. It is clear she either didn’t know Hannah well or didn’t care for her. It came across very forced and awkward. Something Clay picked up on.
     There are many flashbacks to Hannah and Clays interactions. From him being a trainee under Hannah at the movie theater. To a falling out they have over a rumor concerning her. I paid close attention to her actions and way of treating other. She came across as a bit of a bully to me; at least in regards to Clay. Comments like “Wow you are an actual nerd aren’t you? I admire that, it takes courage being a nerd”, make it sound like he should be ashamed of his interests. Later, Hannah again teases Clay about his build and demeanor, asking him if his dad is also thin and nervous. Though Clay laughs it off, those are the kinds of comments that can eat at a teen’s confidence and sense of self-worth.
     It is not uncommon at all for those who are bullied to bully others.  It tends to be a way they try to validate themselves after being brought down. We also currently live in a time where the teen years are a time of ridicule and teasing. Often brushed off with excuses like “They are being kids”, “It’s just a joke”, “Don't take things so seriously”, and “That’s just how kids your age act”. While sometime that is true, it is important to take in to account how it makes others feel. You may be joking, but it can hurt others.
     Near the end of the episode it is revealed how Hannah started getting bullied through the spread of rumors. As well as a picture being sent around that looked bad without content. A situation I feel like could have been avoided if she had listened to her mother and stayed home to do her homework. A little side note that even if we can’t see it, in most cases parents to have our best interest at heart. By sneaking out and meeting a boy alone she put herself in a very vulnerable situation. *Please note I am not justifying him lying and letting his friends send out the picture* But as teens and young adults we do need to consider the situations we put ourselves in to.
     Another point of bullying and manipulation I noticed was the tapes themselves. Hannah has left these tapes detailing the wrongs done to her. In the first tape she says that “if you are listening you are one of the reasons ‘why’”. A point of blame for her suicide. Hannah also mentions that she left a copy of tapes with someone in case one of the people on her list doesn’t pass the tapes on, they will be made public. It makes it seem almost like blackmail, holding the information on the tapes over the heads of those she blames for her choice.  Near the end of the first episode Clay is emotionally unsure if he can listen to all of the tapes and doesn’t understand how things could get “worse” than Hannah being dead, but is guilted by both Hannah’s tapes and the party responsible for the tapes to continue.
     Overall the whole thing seems blame and revenge driven. Based on this first episode it seems like it deals more with bullying then depression. But it is still early. The episode itself is very thought provoking and emotional. It had me up all night thinking. What if I had taken down the names of those who had hurt and bullied me? Who had I thought could have been responsible for my suicide attempt? Who’s names would be on my list? These are scary questions, unhealthy even. That is not a good way to think about or look at suicide. It is not a blame game. No matter who may have contributed to my hurting, at the end of the day what I attempted was 100% on me. It was MY choice, MY action to take. There is no excuse for bullying. And it can be far more harmful to others than we can imagine. However that is no exception for the character of Hannah. She made the choice to take her own life, the only reason, the only name, should be her own. 

     Anyhow, those are my thoughts on the first episode. I am both interested and concerned on how the story develops from here.  Stay Tuned for the next “Review: 13 Reasons Why”


~Samantha Lou