Up and down, round and round, up and down I go. In the last couple days, I have felt better and then worse, and then I've been better, and then I've been worse. Sometimes the better has lasted hours. Sometimes it's been only minutes of relief. It's so frustrating. I am beside myself. I don't know what else to do. I don't feel like I can expect anything to stay the same for very long.

Today was particularly frustrating and painful. I felt okay when I got out of bed. I went for my tempo run, as planned, prior to seeing my psychiatrist at 8:30 AM. After my run, the world went dark. I crashed. By the time I saw my doc, I could barely hear myself talk. She increased one of my meds. It's helped in the past.

I slept much of the day. I could hardly wake up. Everything was slowed. I was so low. Earlier in the week, I planned to run a cross country, 5K race tonight. As race time approached, I forced myself out the door. The race was literally just down the road at a local golf course. I got there, signed up to run, and then sat on a tree stump awaiting the start. The high school cross country meet was still being run, so there were probably 500 parents, spectators, and kids running around. I felt alone in the crowd.

I began to leave, but someone stopped me to chat. I ended up running the race, a difficult, hilly affair, and I ran well. Go figure. The pain of effort felt better than the pain of emptiness. I came home 1.5 hours after I left, and my mood was good. It was like night and day.

I chatted on the phone with some friends who had been concerned. I told them I was okay. After that I took Puck for our usual walk. We were half way through our walk when the darkness descended again. Within 45 minutes of telling my friends I was well, I felt dark, heavy and alone. It didn't make any sense.

I am frustrated and baffled. It seems I am on my own private roller coaster. I'm doing life. I'm working, running, staying connected with friends, and following doctor's orders. But I can't seem to get off the roller coaster.


Huh... I just re-read this post, and I realized something. I wouldn't expect a cancer patient's illness to go into remission because she was doing all the "right" things. I wouldn't expect a diabetic to suddenly be free of diabetes because he went to work. Why am I expecting my depression to magically go away? It seems I'm forgetting this is an illness. And sometimes, like many illnesses, it just doesn't make sense.

This roller coaster is no fun. Feeling low sucks. I'd like to be able to change my illness with my actions, but I think I've now proven there's more to it than that. I think it is important to keep doing what I've been doing. I'd likely feel a hell of a lot worse right now if I hadn't taken my meds or run that race. But I have to remember I'm dealing with depression--the illness--and sometimes, no matter what I do, it rears its ugly, ugly head. I'll try to be more patient. This too, I know, shall pass.