Writing here has been difficult lately, as I have been struggling with fatigue, or more definitively, somnolence. My doc and I have slowly figured out that one of the major causes of my slower-than-normal running pace is a significantly increased heart rate. Recently, we realized the culprit behind the increased heart rate was one of my most beneficial medications. It is a med I take primarily for fatigue. Fatigue became a crippling symptom of my depression about 2-3 years ago. This med, once I started it, changed my life. I was able to function again.

One significant piece of my functioning life is running and racing. I am a runner. It is part of my identity. I have been incredibly frustrated over the past couple years with my running, as no matter how well-trained I've been, I have not been able to come near my past running performances. Not only that, but running paces that would have been "too slow" just a couple years ago have been painful, breathless, slogs since.

Fortunately and unfortunately, we now realize this fatigue medication is the culprit. It's main side effect for me (and another female runner my doc treats) is an increased heart rate. For a runner, increasing the resting heart rate is tortuous! It's akin to being totally out of shape despite thousands of hours and hundreds of miles of training! I've been breathless and unable to move my body any faster at what used to be a mundane pace. It's been very frustrating.

Fortunately, figuring out that it is the medication causing the problem means the problem is easily fixable. Decrease the medication! And that's what we've been doing over the past 4-6 weeks. Decreasing the med didn't seem to cause an increase in fatigue initially. Unfortunately, it also did not decrease my heart rate nor facilitate improved running tolerance.

We decreased the medication again about 10-14 days ago. Low and behold, I just completed a breakthrough running week! I saw almost miraculous improvements in my running pace and tolerance! Unfortunately, I've also begun to re-experience some days, like yesterday, where I've not been able to wake-up nor stay awake. Days, like yesterday, where I've run and run well, but otherwise slept almost as many hours as I was awake. The med decrease improved my running life, as I wished. But what about the rest of my life?

What do I do? Do I increase the med, which will increase my heart rate and slow my running again leaving me frustrated and non-competitive? Do I stay on the decreased med, run fast, which improves my self-esteem and confidence, but otherwise struggle to function due to debilitating fatigue? I don't know. I don't know.

I'm worried. I don't want to have to make this decision, and maybe I won't have to after all. There are other possibilities for the present fatigue. I don't have to figure it all out today, right? I pray I don't have to figure it out at all. The dilemma feels impossible. Do I take more of the med and improve my life, or do I take less of the med and improve my life? I pray I don't have to decide.

What would you do?