I just came in from a gloriously sunny, cool, 10-mile run. I felt great. It was my second run since finishing the New York City Marathon last Sunday. It was nice to be out on my local, familiar trails running with Jet again. I missed him a lot while I was gone. I loved New York, but it's nice to be home. I'm slowly settling back into my routine. 
The finish line in Central Park
I've been home from New York for a few days. Jet and I reunited Wednesday evening. I returned to work Thursday and Friday. I attended my usual Saturday meeting this morning. I've got some leaves to rake and some errands to run, but I'm kind of enjoying simply sitting on my butt right now. Jet's napping. I may join him soon.

I enjoyed New York City in the days immediately following the marathon. I spent all day Monday and Tuesday touring the city. I'm a huge Seinfeld fan, so I checked out some of the familiar television show sites, including Tom's Restaurant (aka Monk's Cafe) and The Original Soupman (aka The Soup Nazi). I toured St. Paul's Chapel near Ground Zero and the 9/11 Museum. I was in the museum 2.5 hours when I realized I couldn't absorb another minute. I left despite there being much more to see. It was an amazing museum. I will go back.


I also traveled over to Brooklyn where I ate at Grimaldi's Pizza, which has been honored as "the best pizza in New York City." It's located right under the Brooklyn Bridge, so I took advantage and walked to the top of the bridge, which was pretty cool. Then I spent much of the day walking along the Brooklyn waterfront, where there was a lot of green space and amazing views of the Manhattan skyline. I took in the sites and sounds of Greenwich Village late into the night.

Manhattan skyline and Brooklyn Bridge
I'm already thinking about my next marathon. I've got a few tentatively penciled into my schedule, including one in December and one in January. Unfortunately New York was so spendy, I may not be able to afford the time off or expense of another race for awhile. I'm looking at races within driving, albeit long driving, distance. I've definitely got the marathon bug again. I don't want to wait until Spring to experience another one. 

Thank you, my friends, for your support over these past few years of illness and injury. Your comments have carried me through some difficult times. I am grateful for my New York City experience, and I am so grateful to be back running again. I feel I've reclaimed a huge piece of what makes me, me. That's pretty cool.