I'm sending a huge thanks to all of you who took the time to comment on my last post. Your shared experience really helped. Instead of isolated and alone, I felt normal. I appreciated your thoughts, suggestions, and words of encouragement. I swear I have the best readers on the planet! Thank you so much.

Some of Sunday's sadness has passed. I had therapy yesterday, and that certainly helped a lot. It's so nice to have a psychologist I respect and trust. After leaving her office, I felt a weight had been lifted from my shoulders. And I don't even think I mentioned Sunday's sadness! I had a lot to talk about.

Besides therapy, exercise has also helped cure my blues. I'm in the middle of one of my most difficult weeks of training. The Austin Marathon is coming up fast. Yesterday I ran a wicked speed workout, 6 x 1200 meters. It was tough, and I felt great when I finished. Tomorrow I'm scheduled to do a tempo workout, but I'll probably do my 20 mile long run instead. The 20-miler is scheduled for Saturday, but it's going to be really warm tomorrow (that's a temperature in the 20-30 degree range around here). So I'll likely run the 20 tomorrow. It will be nice to have my last 20-miler done. The taper toward race day follows!

Work, playing with friends, and AA have all been conducive to healing as well. My sponsor celebrated 21 years of sobriety last night. Wow! I've been sober 5 years, and that feels like an eternity! I can't imagine being sober for 21 years. There's another person I respect and trust, my sponsor. I'm also sponsoring again. So I've been spending time getting out of myself and helping my new sponsee. Focusing on others is always good for my mental health. Spending time with a newly recovering person reminds me of where I've been and of how far I've come. I'm so grateful for that.

Thank you again, readers. If you only knew how much your comments matter. Once again, I feel you help me more than I help you. But that's okay. After all, we're all in this together.