The heat of last week finally broke over the weekend. It was perfect timing, as I had 17 miles scheduled for Saturday morning. And I did it! I got up very early and was on the road before 5:30 AM. The air was warm, but the humidity had broken and clouds covered the sun. It was actually a rather pleasant 2 and 1/2 hours out there.

During my run, I had a low point around mile 8, which was exactly where I crashed at Grandma's Marathon last month. My legs were tired, my brain was negative, and all I wanted to do was give up. But I didn't. I forced myself to continue running. I worked on reversing my negative thoughts, and the low moment passed. I then felt stronger and stronger until the last miles of my run. It was very good for my confidence and morale. It turned out to be a great run.

I was a little worried about how I would recover after that effort, especially since it was my first long run since Grandma's and since recovering from pneumonia. Fortunately, I had nothing physically taxing to do afterward. I was lucky to spend much of the rest of the day with friends, Bill and Cindy, socializing and relaxing on their patio. I'm so grateful to have such unconditional, fabulous friends. We never tire of spending time with each other. Later in the evening, I took Puck for a 2 mile walk, and my legs felt good. I was pleased.

I was even more pleased on Sunday when I was able to complete another fairly tough workout. I rode my bike 31.5 miles throughout the countryside. I rode hard, but not all out. I was pleasantly surprised with the strength in my legs. I was expecting more fatigue than I encountered. Instead, I was able to enjoy the weather, the farm fields, and my freedom to ride. It was another confidence-boosting workout for me.

It's nice to feel alive again. First the pneumonia had me dragging. Then the heat kept me shut inside. Now I feel like I've regained some strength and perspective. I feel better about my training and more hopeful about achieving the goals I've set. But I'm not getting carried away yet. I have a difficult speed workout scheduled tomorrow. Hopefully, the result will be three strong, positive workouts in a row. I'll be over the moon if that turns out to be the case!