I have big news. I still feel well. With every passing day, my mood continues to either improve or at least hold steady. Perhaps the combination of beginning C-PAP therapy, running again, and eating well have made a difference.

I'm certain being able to run again has made a big difference. I've already run 3 times this week. I'm still inserting walk breaks into my runs, but I've been able to increase my pace and lengthen the running segments on almost every run. It's been very cold the last few days, so I've spent most of my time running on the treadmill, a.k.a. the dreadmill. But I'm not complaining. I'm happy to be running, and so far my hip is holding up well. I'm pleased with my progress this week.

I'm continuing to adapt to the C-PAP therapy for my mild sleep apnea. It's difficult wearing something on my face all night, but I'm sticking to it nonetheless. The first few nights were amazing. I woke up rested for the first time in years! I had forgotten what that felt like. But over the past few weeks, I've had many nights which weren't restful as well. We're making adjustments and continuing to tinker with the settings in hopes that more nights will be restful. It's not been the miracle cure my doctors and I were hoping it would be, but I do think better sleep has positively impacted my mood.

The other change I've made recently is eating better. I gained almost ten pounds over the past 3+ months since my hip surgery. I really felt that weight when I began running again, and that discomfort finally gave me the impetus to do something different. So I've been using a free online program and mobile app to track my calories and exercise. I began earlier this week, and I've already lost two pounds! Paying attention to what I put in my mouth really encourages me to eat less and to eat healthier. Eating well also makes me feel better. It's all good.

It's interesting. My mood and my energy had to improve in order to make these changes. At the same time, these changes have definitely helped improve my mood. When my depression symptoms are bad, I eat junk and I don't care, I don't move as much, and I don't sleep as well, or I sleep too much. It's nice to care again. It's nice to be moving again. And it's nice to sleep enough that I'm not walking around tired all day. I like feeling better. I'm hopeful it will continue.