While my mood remains strong and fairly positive, I've been dealing with a few screwy thoughts lately. My thinking has been a bit off. This happens to me every once in awhile, and I don't like it. I don't like it at all. I'm actually surprised I'm about to admit it here, as I generally don't like to talk about it. These thoughts I sometimes have make me feel, well, "crazy."

It started a couple of weeks ago with very graphic, violent thoughts of terrible things happening to my puppy, Jet. The thoughts were so real, it often took me awhile to recognize they were just thoughts. They were very disturbing, and I had to work to get the thoughts out of my brain.

The thoughts about Jet triggered a resurgence of grief about Puck, my 13 year old black lab who died on December, 14th, 2012. I began reliving the last moments of his life over and over again. On my runs, at work, and when I closed my eyes at night, the pictures of his final moments were there again and again. Worse, I experienced fresh grief, which was difficult to deal with, every time those thoughts occupied my brain.

I struggled with the graphic thinking about Jet and the grief-filled thoughts about Puck for a little over a week. They slowly faded from my consciousness. Although truthfully, I haven't entirely let them go yet, as here I am still thinking about them, or maybe more accurately, my experience of them. They still disturb me.

These thoughts disturb me because I don't understand where they come from. I think if there was a reason for them they would be easier for me to deal with. But when thoughts bombard me from out of the blue, I get that "crazy" feeling. The violence and graphic nature of the thoughts also alarm me. What is that all about? Why? Where does that come from? Perhaps if I knew the answers to these questions, I'd be able to address and rid myself of the thoughts more quickly. Who knows.

I'm going to quit writing about the disturbing thoughts now, as revealing them makes me feel a bit vulnerable. Thankfully, as I mentioned, they've faded. Hopefully writing about them will give the thoughts the final boot from my brain. That would be nice. It would be even nicer if they never came back.