You know, I'm 40 years old, and this is the first time in my life I have been this close to cancer. I guess I've been lucky. I've had friends with parents, siblings, or others in their lives who have had cancer. Every time I work I treat patients with often debilitating cancer or long histories of living with cancer. And I've known plenty of people who have had pre-cancerous or cancerous skin lesions removed, but I've not ever had a friend or family member diagnosed. I never thought about this before today. Never had reason to think about it until learning that my friend will die from her cancer--maybe months, hopefully years--but it will take her nonetheless. I've been lucky not to have been this close before.

I had the unfortunate opportunity to think about another irony today. An hour prior to learning of my friend's cancer, I learned that a colleague's nephew killed himself yesterday afternoon. Despite my family history of mental illness, my former career in mental health, and my own battle with depression; I have not had to directly endure the trauma of suicide. A former college professor and counselor of mine did commit suicide, but I had long since graduated and knew nothing of her plight until many months after she had died. I was spared the horror my co-worker is presently experiencing. Again I've been fortunate, and I'm grateful for that.
Side note: Now that I am thinking about it, my former professor's battle with depression apparently began after she had surgery for brain cancer.

My thoughts in comparison to these two events are trivial, and I am a bit embarrassed to even write them down. I did not want this post to be about me. The last thing either of my stricken friends would care about tonight are my ironies. Nonetheless, today I was struck by the shock of these coinciding events and by my unfamiliarity with each of them. I wish I was doing a better job of explaining my feelings, trivial though they may be. I guess that's why I started to write this post...to come to some understanding of what it is I am feeling. Shocked. Sad. Unsure.
I am feeling shocked, sad, and unsure.
Okay. Now what do I do?

I think I'll start with a prayer.
Thanks for listening.
Good night.