It's been a few days since I've written. Sorry about that. D was here for the past three days, and we were having such a nice time together, it was impossible to step away. Here's the weekend re-cap.

As I explained in my last post, on Wednesday night I had barely enough energy to remain upright. Apparently I slept well Wednesday night because I awoke Thursday morning with enough energy to attempt my 17 mile long run, and I had a very good run! I kept my pace conservative and took frequent re-fueling breaks. That did the trick. I had a nice run on a beautiful day, and I had energy left over to prepare for D's Friday arrival.

D arrived early Friday evening. We had a great weekend. I ran a 4 mile women's race Saturday morning. He cheered me on and got to meet many of my friends and co-workers. As I was proudly introducing him around, I realized how entrenched I am within the local running community. I was surprised at how many people I introduced him to, all of them friends, even though I may only see some of them at running-related events. I left that race feeling like a part of, rather than apart from, the community in which I live. For someone who thinks of herself as a loner, that was surprising to me.

The race was great fun for several reasons. Three of my co-workers, all of whom have had struggles with weight and are barely beginning runners, decided to join me and run the race. The course was two laps around a small lake, so after I finished it was easy to go back and run to the finish with them. I was so proud of all three of them. I think they each performed better than they imagined they could, and we all had a great time afterward. I have some very funny co-workers.

Like my co-workers, I also performed better than I expected. I ran the 4 miles in 27:58, hardly my best time, but better than 7 minutes per mile. It's been so long since I've run a short race, I had no idea what kind of pace I could maintain. To dip in under 7 minutes per mile was quite satisfying for this aging runner. I think I finished 6th overall, and I was 1st in my age group. Those were just bonuses, though. The real fun was having D with me and watching my co-workers succeed. It was a great start to a lovely weekend.

The rest of the weekend was just for D and I. We spent time playing with Jet, sharing nice meals, watching baseball and movies, and running together. We enjoyed the local county fair where we mingled with baby animals and ate really unhealthy deep-fried food on a stick! D, the life-long city boy, even got to milk a life-size, fake cow! That may have been the highlight of the whole weekend!

It's always difficult when D goes home, yet it is nice to get back to my routine. I'm expecting a good, busy week of work and running ahead. I've got a longer race next weekend to look forward to, and in 3 weeks D and I will be together again to race a half marathon.

Things are going well. Life is good. I'm feeling blessed. I don't know what I did to feel so well, but I'm sure glad I do!