I don't know exactly why. Nothing significant happened. Nothing significant was said. We were in the middle of a camping store, and I found some cool dog gear, and I got sad. Then we went to Walmart, and we were shopping for cabin necessities, and I got sadder. I checked out before Bill and Cindy, went to the car, and sat in the grass and cried.

Mourning, sad, lonely...I think I was a little of each. The dog gear reminded me that my boy is getting old, unable to do many of the cool things for which the cool gear was intended. I think I've been coming to this realization slowly, as his body has been slowly letting him down. No fetch, no haphazard climbing and jumping, and very little running... The reckless abandon, which brought joy to his heart and sparkle to his eyes over the past 10 years, is quickly becoming a thing of the past. I'm mourning that loss.

I think the mourning led to a sense of alone-ness while negotiating Walmart with my two best, married friends. We are visiting Bill's family cabins here in Colorado, and every Independence Day much of his extended family gathers here. The sense of belonging among them is palpable. Bill and Cindy are as happily married as two people can be, and of course they are part of that extended family. And then there's me. I don't usually experience this around Bill and Cindy, as I have truly become part of their family, but last night I felt like the third wheel. I was alone among friends.

Puck is my family. He has been my singular partner for the last 8 years. He and I have stood alone. The mourning in the camping store quickly turned to loneliness in Walmart, I think. Projecting into the future never leads to positive results, and that was true again last night. Thinking about Puck's losses led to thoughts of Puck's ultimate loss. Where am I going to be when Puck is gone? Combine that thought with Bill talking about moving away within the year, and it is now seems clear why I felt alone--and sad. My family will eventually change. There will be future losses, and those thoughts made me sad.

So this morning I guess I'm working on acceptance. As the Big Book of AA says, "...and acceptance is the answer to all of my problems today." I'm still feeling sad. I'm not going to fight it. I guess that's where I need to be at the moment. But I'm not going to dwell on it either. Dwelling could lead down a long, dark path. Acceptance is the light at the end of that tunnel.

Life changes. In reality, I don't know what the future holds. Puck may live 5 more years of joyful bliss. Maybe he'll happily adjust to less activity and more leisure. I don't know. Bill and Cindy may or may not move away. Who knows? I may or may not move with them. It's impossible to say and therefore pointless to consider today. Instead, I'll try to go with the flow--soak in the company, the beauty, and the time with my boy. Life changes. I'll work on accepting that today.