I found out this morning that Healthline has again selected my blog as one of the top depression blogs of 2014. Wow. I think this is the sixth year I've been selected. That's pretty cool. I'm honored and humbled again. A blog I started basically for myself, which I hoped a couple of other people might see and glean something positive from, has become something larger, and longer lasting, than I ever imagined. Now when I write, I do so with the understanding that a few of you out there are not only reading but counting on me to keep moving forward. In that way, this blog helps me more than you know. I cannot give up. I must keep up the fight. And by continuing to fight, I hope I might inspire at least one of you to keep fighting, too. We cannot let depression win.

Shortly after receiving the news about my blog, I went out to breakfast with my mom and step-father. They are back in the north land after spending all winter in the southern states. We went out to one of our usual, local establishments. We're not big spenders, but we had plenty of food and coffee to fill our bellies. After lingering for awhile, chatting, my step-father took the check to the host to pay our bill. He returned two minutes later, confused look on his face, still holding our bill and his credit card. My mom inquired, "What's the matter?" My step-dad stammered, "He wouldn't take my money." Incredulous, my mom and I said in unison, "What do you mean?" Still stuttering and looking shell-shocked, my step-dad said, "The host said someone had already paid our bill."

I've heard of this happening. People paying for the groceries of the person in line behind them or the gas in another person's car... I've heard about this. Never in a million years did I think it would happen to me! And based on my step-dad's utterly shocked and confused demeanor, neither did he! My parents and I sat there in stunned silence, trying to figure out exactly what had just happened, when I finally just said, "Wow," and we got up and walked out. This gesture, by a totally anonymous stranger, was an incredible gesture. It made our day! We haven't stopped talking about it yet. We decided we will need to pay the gesture forward in the near future, and I can't wait until we do that.

It's been an interesting, fruitful day. I've been the recipient of two generous and humbling gestures. My faith in humanity has been propped up today. I can't wait to see what the rest of the day brings.