Well, I took the leap! I signed up for a new class at my gym. It's called "Why Not Tri," and it's meant to prepare me, and 24 others, for our first triathlon. The class runs every Monday and Wednesday from 5:30-7:00 AM. I believe we will also have a training schedule to follow the other days of the week. It's a big time commitment. The class runs from next week through mid-April. Our last class is an indoor triathlon! I'm pretty anxious about this, but I was anxious about my 40-days-of-yoga class last year, too. And that turned out to be an amazing experience! Hopefully this class will also be great.

Just as I did for the yoga class, I have to do a body composition pre-test and post-test for this class. Today was my pre-test, and boy did I get surprised! I was shocked to learn that I have 17.1% body fat. That puts me in the ultra lean category, yet I am at one of my heaviest weights ever. I don't look ultra lean. My clothes don't fit like I'm ultra lean. I'm not sure if I should trust this test even though it is Mayo Clinic high tech equipment!

Since I was surprised by the result, last year I was at 18.8% before and 18.2% after the yoga class, I asked the fitness professional about it. He wondered if I had recently lost weight. No. Or had I been lifting a lot of weights? No. He didn't have any more ideas. We were stumped.

Of course I've been thinking about it off and on throughout the day, and I've decided it's got to be the swimming! The swimming must have increased my lean muscle mass, and decreased my percentage of body fat. (No wonder I feel like I'm sinking in the pool!) What else could it be?

It's weird. I'm not sure how to feel. On the one hand, I'm thrilled to be lean. On the other hand, I don't feel lean, and I am, in fact, heavier than I've ever been. I feel that heaviness when running--it makes me work harder and slows me down. So I'm not sure what to do with this information. I'm not sure how to feel. It's weird.

It will be interesting to see how I change after following a triathlon training program. I'm looking forward, with trepidation, to finding out.