I awoke at 3:50 AM, as planned, to a flash of lightning outside my window. Uh-Oh. Today's weather forecast called for a 90% chance of thunderstorms. Well, I thought, maybe it's better in LaCrosse. By the time my friend arrived at 4:30 AM, it was thundering, lightning, and absolutely pouring buckets of rain. This should be interesting, I thought. We began our drive east, but the weather not only did not improve, it got much, much worse. The rain was coming down so hard it was difficult to drive. One hour into our journey, about 10 miles from LaCrosse, it began to hail. We pulled under an overpass, checked the race website, but still no word regarding the status of the race. The hail stopped. We pushed on. Ten minutes later, they called it. The marathon was cancelled.

Disappointed, we turned around. As my friend drove away in her car, I wondered what the hell I was going to do. After all, I totally carbo-loaded yesterday. I had to exercise! But I was so disappointed and discombobulated, I just wanted to lie down. Ten minutes later, on my way to lying on the floor with Puck, I called my friend, Maureen, back. She had just arrived at her home in the country. Rather than lie down, as I really wanted to do, I got back into my car, drove to her house, and we ran 16 miles together. I feel better now. Now I can lie down!

What a weird morning. We were all geared up to run 26.2 miles. Then all the air was sucked from our sails. Then there we were, running down the road anyway. I'm glad I called Maureen back, and I'm really glad I ran long rather than lying down. I know I'd feel really crappy right now if I would have given in to the disappointment and just slept. Instead, I feel satisfied. I'm still disappointed, but I'm satisfied. Running saved me once again.

Instead of dwelling on this missed opportunity, Maureen and I decided to sign up for the local marathon, which will be run here in three weeks on May 27th. We laughed as we made this decision because we both did Boston in the heat, and today we got cancelled because of lightning and hail, so we figure we're due for some really pristine weather at our next event! Let's hope it is so.