I'm trying not to panic. Things have been going so well physically. My knee has been feeling really good. I've not noticed it at all with any of my runs. The only time I've even been reminded of my surgically repaired knee has been with squats and lunges during strength training. And therein lies the problem...apparently.

I attended my favorite strength training class yesterday afternoon. I so enjoy working my muscles and strengthening my body. A strong body makes my running so much easier. Lunging and squatting during yesterday's class was exactly what I was doing when my right knee began bugging me a bit. I, of course, worked through it. It didn't feel critical. Just soreness, I thought.

I thought wrong. The 30-minute class ended. I stood around for a few minutes chatting with the instructor and then made my way to the locker room. My knee felt odd and sore. After getting changed I began walking to my car and BAM! Suddenly I could barely walk. Pain shot through my knee. I had to walk on my tip toes to make it to my car. I was totally freaked out!

By the time I got home, the knee felt a little better. It was sore, but I could walk. I was determined to walk it off, or perhaps I was just being stupid, so I took Puck for his usual 1.7 mile walk. I iced it off and on for the rest of the evening. I said a lot of prayers that it would be better by this morning. It's not. I'm afraid my medial meniscus might be torn.

I've e-mailed my orthopedic surgeon, and I will call for an appointment as soon as his office opens, but I'm so, so disappointed! I've been doing so well. I've been sticking to and following every planned workout, whether I felt like doing it or not. My running has been slowly getting back to normal. I've been cautiously optimistic about actually being able to run The Boston Marathon (rather than walking the majority of it). I've been through so much to get here, and now this?? Why? Dammit!

Dammit! I pray it's just a temporary set-back. Please pray with me. And I'll try not to panic.