It's hard to believe, but my 30th high school reunion is coming up this summer. 30 years! Talking with a friend the other day, we were chuckling about how, 30 years ago, we thought people our current age were so terribly old. And now here I am, 48 years old, 30 years removed from those high school days. It's hard to believe.

I have yet to decide if I'm going to attend my reunion. Despite being a good student, an athlete, and having had a steady boyfriend, I never felt like I fit in during high school. I wouldn't say I was popular, but I wasn't unpopular either. I just felt like I didn't fit. This was especially true after the age of 15, my sophomore year of high school, which is when my first bout with depression began.

That bout with depression may have something to do with my indecisiveness regarding attending the reunion as well. As an adult, it has become apparent when my depression symptoms are bad, I have difficulty forming new memories. Whether it's the result of depression or not, the fact is I don't remember a lot of my high school years.

I have a general, fuzzy overview of high school, but specific memories are lacking. I worry I'll look like a lost puppy while reminiscing with friends at the reunion. I have a fear of feeling left out...
um... not fitting in, 30 years later! (Okay, that was difficult to admit.) Of course, this is reinforced on Facebook when old classmates make references to past events I can't recall. I hate that.

Depression plays a roll in another piece of this puzzle. When I went off to college, I packed all of my yearbooks, photos, awards, etc... in boxes and stored them in my mom and former stepfather's garage. They divorced shortly thereafter, and my mom moved out, but my brothers and I continued to maintain contact with my former stepfather. He's still in our lives today.

Fast forward multiple years. I am now in the throes of my adult depression. My former stepfather announces he's selling his home and asks my brothers and I to remove our stuff from his garage. He also, apparently, told us he would throw out anything we left behind.

I never retrieved my boxes. I don't know why. I don't remember. I probably couldn't pull myself together to make the 4.5 hour journey. And my former stepfather threw out all of my high school yearbooks, photos, awards, etc... Everything from my childhood and teenage years...gone.

If I had some reference points, like yearbook photos, I'm certain I'd have some concrete high school memories. I'm also certain I'd feel a lot more connected to my past and be much less worried about attending my reunion. I don't want to look, or feel, like a lost puppy. It sucks not being able to remember.

To make matters worse, it's not only high school memories which have disappeared. Depression has stripped many of my adult memories, too, whether due to the side effects of ECT treatment or simply because of the illness itself. It doesn't matter, the memories are gone either way, and I end up feeling lost in space. It's disconcerting.

Disconcerting is often my reality. The missing memories are unlikely to return. I have so little, internally or externally, connecting me to what's gone on before, I truly must live each moment for that moment. Sometimes that's okay, but with this reunion coming up, I wish I was a bit more tethered.