I wonder if I got hit by a mack truck in my sleep. It sure feels like it. Actually, it started yesterday. My whole body aches and my muscles feel totally spent. Even my brain hurts! I think Wednesday was just a little too busy, and things really haven't let up since.

On Wednesday, besides my regular two-a-day workouts, I also had golf lessons and a softball game. Worse yet, the softball game started at 9:15 PM! I'm usually sound asleep by then! It didn't help matters that we lost our game 30-something to one. That was frustrating. Perhaps I need to find a more competitive team. But I digress...where was I? Oh yes, Wednesday--Wednesday was a very long day.

Yesterday wasn't much better. I did the start-of-care patient I wrote about in the previous post. The whole process is supposed to take around 3 hours. It took me 6 hours to finish it! I spent two hours with the patient and four hours reviewing history and documenting. I was so overwhelmed when I got back to the office I almost started crying when someone asked me how it went. That startled me. I know I'm frazzled if routine questions bring me to near-tears.

I was tired and sore when I got home, and for the first time since January (except in the case of illness) I skipped a workout. I was supposed to ride my bike for 60 minutes, but I just couldn't do it. I figured I'd better listen to my body, even though that was hard to do. After all, I wasn't happy with what my bod was saying. I did get the strength workout done before work yesterday, so I didn't miss everything.

I contemplated adding the 60 minutes onto today's schedule, but it's been a long, long day again, and I'm still tired and sore. I dragged myself out of bed this morning, went to the pool, and swam 2000 yards. That's a long way when you're tired. I have to ride and run tomorrow, so it doesn't make sense to add another bike ride into tonight's schedule. I'm trying to be okay with letting it go undone. How am I doing so far? I really hope my bones aren't so weary in the morning.

There's much more going on, but I'm tired of looking at a computer. I've been using one all day, so I'm going to sign off for now. I'm sorry for the brevity. Hopefully life will slow down soon. Then I can give you, and me, more time.

The man who can drive himself further once the effort gets painful is the man who will win. --Roger Bannister