Dressage [druh-sahzh; Fr. dre-sazh] 1. a series of intricate steps, gaits, etc., taught to an exhibition horse. 2. the art or method of training a horse in obedience and in precision of movement.

Boxing [bok-sing] 1. the act, technique, or profession of fighting with the fists, with or without boxing gloves. (Source: Dictionary.com)
The Olympics are good news for insomniacs. For the next 15 days, you'd be hard pressed to spend one middle of the night waking moment without the availability of televised sports. Unfortunately, as I learned at 3:15 a.m., the "sports" available include two men pummeling each other in a small, square, ring(?) and woolen-clad riders atop prancing horses in a large, rectangular, ring(?). Okay, aren't rings circular? Isn't that the definition of ring? Sorry, lack of sleep leaves me a bit distractable. Where was I?
Oh, yah... horses, wool jackets, 90 degrees, top hats...dressage. At 3:15 in the morning, dressage took center stage. Now, I love horses, despite being deathly allergic to them--literally, turn blue, stop breathing, allergic. But I digress again... I had to look up the exact definition of this "sport," because for the life of me, I could not figure out what the hell I was looking at! At least with boxing, I know the goal--last guy standing wins! But dressage?? Not so easy to determine the goal.
In my sleep-deprived, pre-dawn stupor, this is what I saw. There was a beautiful horse, a sweaty rider--totally inappropriate attire for 90 degrees, and a bunch of stiff judges sitting in a booth. Horse and rider stoically walked, trotted, and pranced forward, sideways, diagonally and in circles. It appeared very serious and stressful, but God only knows why! Not much to "ooooh" and "aaaah" about unless you knew what was going on. With the exception of one horse who tried to flee the ring, rider in tow, (that was momentarily exciting) all the competitors looked pretty much the same to me. Perhaps the lower scoring horses neglected to point their hooves?
I kept waiting for the announcers to enlighten me, but they weren't much help either. Actually, they were so unenlightening, I should have been droned right back to sleep! I mean, c'mon! Even in beach volleyball, an infinitely more familiar sport, the commentators repeatedly explained the rules, scoring and strategy of the game.

I guess if the insomnia continues, I'll have to stick to two guys pummeling each other in a small, square ring. It ain't nearly as pretty, but at least it makes sense.