Did I mention I'm going to Mexico this Thursday? D is graciously taking me to Mexico for 5 days. We fly in and out of Milwaukee, so I'll leave Wednesday right after work in order to be prepared for our early morning flight on Thursday. We are staying at an all-inclusive, adults only resort right on the ocean in southern Mexico. This place is so fancy! It may be out of my league. I tend to be more of a cabin-in-the-woods kind of gal. Nonetheless, I have to admit I am looking forward to being pampered for a few days. The warm sun will feel really nice in the middle of our long winter. I can't wait.

I've been hustling and bustling around here lately. Work has been a bit busier, which is good. Outside of my primary job, I've been busy with meetings, track club responsibilities, running, working at my second job, preparing for vacation, and lastly, and most significantly, I've been going through the adoption process.

I spotted a rescued black lab puppy online, and he spoke to me. The process of adopting him is quite thorough, and in order to get him, I have to complete everything by the time I leave for Mexico, even though he will stay with his foster family until I return.

I had no plans to adopt another dog so soon after Puck's death. After all, it's only been a bit over 3 weeks since he died. I knew I'd probably eventually get another dog, but I really had no intent yet. While perusing an online adoption site, Virgil's adorable little face popped up. He was rescued from a "kill shelter" (an oxymoron if I've ever heard one!) in the southern US. He's somewhere between 3 and 4 months old. He's a lab mixed with some other type of dog, but nobody is sure exactly what type yet.

Unfortunately, he's in a foster home 2 hours from my home, and one of the pre-adoption criteria was that I meet Virgil prior to adopting him. So, after working 7 hours today, I went for a quick run, and then made the 4 hour round trip. I spent about 30 minutes with the little guy. Despite his rough start to life, he's a happy, energetic, playful puppy. He's already kennel trained and is mostly potty trained as well. He knows how to sit and to come when he's called. He was pretty sweet.

Tomorrow someone from the rescue organization is coming to my house to make sure I will be an appropriate home for Virgil. After that I have to complete some more paperwork and, of course, pay for him. As I mentioned, his foster family is happy to continue housing him while I'm in Mexico, and I will go pick him up when I get back.

I confess I've been feeling a little guilty as this adoption process has progressed. I've been more sad about Puck's death, too. I'm not sure what's going on. I think the possibility of getting a new dog brings the sadness surrounding Puck's death to the surface. I even cried myself to sleep last night!

I also wonder if I'm not honoring Puck by getting another pup so soon. I'm worrying that loving a new dog will somehow diminish the love I had for Puck. I know it's silly, but I'm having the worry thoughts, nonetheless. I'm praying for no more worry thoughts. I'm praying that God will see to it that both Virgil and I make this transition gracefully. As usual, your thoughts, and/or prayers are always appreciated.