Have you ever heard of a 46 year old baby tooth? You have now. I have one in the front of my mouth. Unfortunately, it's gotten so loose over the past year it seems it could fall out at any time. But I can't complain. It has given me 46 years. I think that goes about 40 years above and beyond its tour of duty. The permanent tooth just never came in, although it is sitting there above the baby tooth, waiting. Well, my 46 year old baby tooth is now in its final moments of duty. It will be pulled tomorrow, and thus will begin an 18-22 month process of hopefully pulling the permanent tooth into place. I'm not terribly excited.

I'm not excited because the 18-22 month process includes potential oral surgery and eventually getting braces. It all starts tomorrow. Actually, it began last week when I procured the loan to cover the extensive cost of all this orthodontic work. Tomorrow the baby tooth will be pulled, and I will be fit with an appliance which will create room for the permanent tooth. It will cover the roof of my mouth, so I guess I'm going to have a lisp for a couple days. That's what the orthodontist said, anyway. After this appliance does its job, hopefully, I will then be fit with braces. Braces! Fortunately, they make clear ones now, so I won't have a totally tinseled smile. I'm hoping everything goes according to plan, and I'll be the proud wearer of a new smile within two years.

Besides anticipating braces, I've been doing well. My mood is holding steady. I saw my doctor today, and she agreed to decrease the "fat med" again. I'm very grateful for that. I also lost 1.5 pounds since last Monday, which made me very happy. I've added more strength training to my routine, and I think that's helped. My running is also going fairly well. I ran 16 miles on Saturday and 38 miles total last week. That's the most I've run since getting back to it about one month ago. It's still more difficult than I'd like, but it's getting better, so I have a lot to be grateful for today. One foot in front of the other, I'm moving forward.