Isn't that title a glorious understatement? Some days are hard. With depression, especially my current episode, which I believe is now entering its eighth week, a lot of days are hard. I've been out of the hospital for almost seven days now, and I'd say five of the seven days have been extremely difficult. Today is no exception. Depression sucks. And I am so tired of it!

It's been almost one week since I stepped to the other side of those inpatient doors with an energetic step, a smile on my face, and hope in my heart. Instead, I've been battling the battle of illness all over again. I am so tired of depression. My brain is so broken. I thought it was fixed, but that temporary repair appears to have failed quite quickly. I've been following the plan. Now what do I do?

I've been attending all of my appointments. I'm participating in a daily, afternoon, outpatient transitional program. I'm taking my medications as prescribed. I'm talking with my treatment team members on an almost daily basis. I'm exercising when my tired body allows it. Today, for example, I was able to run 5 miles. Amazing. Yet my brain seems not to notice, or care, or positively adjust. Broken, it remains.

My broken brain... It seems to be back in control. I am pervasively sad. I feel discouraged, dejected and hopeless. Random, negative, violent thoughts bound about inside my skull. Changing clothes is a chore. Grooming hardly seems worth it. Performing household chores is virtually impossible. Eating? Thank God for yogurt and cold cereal. I am once again debilitated by depression. I'm so tired. I fear this illness will never let me go.

Today was a decent day, yet the sadness, lethargy, and scary thoughts never left. This mental and physical fatigue wears me down. I am not celebrating Thanksgiving with others today. I do have plenty for which to be grateful, but I do not have the energy to smile, chit chat, and mingle. I fear the energy required to do so would set me back for days. Instead, I ran today. That was a huge success. And that will have to be enough. After all, I'd like to be able to get out of bed tomorrow.

Happy Thanksgiving, friends. With depression, some days are hard. My prayer for you is that today is not one of them. I hope you all have happy, energetic, easy days!