I've been doing okay with my plan to get outside once per day. I've walked or run short distances the last four days in a row. And by short, I mean less than 2 miles on most days. My mood, unfortunately, has remained at an all time low. It's frustrating and unbelievable.

Today, since it was Saturday, I decided to reinstitute a long run of sorts. After all, Boston is on the horizon, and if I am going to have any chance to complete it, I need to get some long runs done. To that end, I scheduled myself for an 8 mile walk/run today.

It was an absolutely gorgeous morning today. The warm winter weather we're having is amazing. I attended my usual AA meeting and then came home to nap. After napping, something I've been needing to do an abundance of lately, I stepped outside to begin my effort. Unfortunately, I knew from the start it wasn't going to be an easy day.

My plan was to run one mile, walk for one minute, and then run again. So really, I was heading out for 8, one mile runs. Doable, I thought. Unfortunately, my body didn't agree. I was winded almost immediately. By mile three, I had the urge to walk for way more than one minute, and after mile four I did just that. I walked through half of mile five, and by mile six, walking 100 percent of the time, I cut my route short and came home.

I was frustrated and disappointed. While I have to give myself credit for getting outside, I'm really stunned at how difficult/impossible my little experiment turned out to be. When I got home, I fell asleep again. My body, it seems, has a mind of its own right now. And that mind is a depressed, sad, fatigued mind at best. I am beside myself with frustration.

I'm trying to get out, even though I don't feel like it. I'm trying to participate in life, even though the thought repulses me. But this depression episode just won't let go. I'm tired all the time. My mood is in the toilet. My motivation is lacking. I'll try to forget about today, and I'll get back out on the road again tomorrow. Maybe two miles is the maximum I can expect from this tired body right now.