I've had an interesting day today. It's my day off, and I had lots of errands and chores to cross off my list. I got up around 6:30 AM with great intentions but immediately knew I was in for a slow start. I just couldn't wake up. I tried. I ate breakfast and had two cups of coffee, but by 8:00 AM I was sleeping once again. I slept from 8-9 and then got up but couldn't wake up. I laid back down. I slept again from 9-10 and 10-11. Each time I got up I was overwhelmed with somnolence. At 11:00 I got dressed in my running clothes for my now long overdue trip to the gym. Getting dressed didn't help. I didn't get out of my house until 1:00 PM! It was a bit ridiculous. Apparently my body needed rest today. I guess I should be glad I had the time to give it.

Despite the slow start, today has been a good day. I'm having a little celebration right now. I just returned from my first run in 2 weeks. I got on the treadmill at the gym with great trepidation, walked for five minutes, and then set the pace for 9:00 minutes per mile. That first mile was pretty tough. Everything hurt. I think I was so nervous about my right calf seizing up that I was altering my gait and causing other areas, like my left knee, to get sore. By mile two I had relaxed a bit and was able to run without pain. I completed 3 one mile segments with one minute walk breaks between each mile. I ran and walked for 40 minutes total. I'm happy to report I'm pleasantly tired and still pain free right now.

I'm feeling happy and hopeful. I'm hopeful I can get back on my training schedule, get back into regular running shape and start racing again. I've got Grandmas Marathon penciled in for mid-June. If I don't get back to training soon, I won't have enough time to prepare. I love Grandmas. I want to run it. Yet I'm going to try my best to take things slow, give my body a chance to adjust to training again, and hopefully continue to run injury free. Patience is not one of my best qualities, but I'm going to do my best.