Those of you who've been around awhile know I was fortunate enough to be featured in four videos created by the website Healthination a few months ago. It was the opportunity of a lifetime for me, and I remain humbled and grateful for their attention. I was very happy with the videos. However,  after filming me for one and a half days, a lot of taped material necessarily did not make it into the final versions. And of all that edited material, there's only one thing I wish had been saved. This is it.

When discussing the losing friends topic, the fourth video, I pointed out that a lot of times friends and family fall out of our lives because they feel helpless. They simply don't know what to do. We all know what to do if someone we love has, for example, cancer. Cards, flowers, help around the house, food...these are all automatic responses. But what to do with the loved one suffering from a depression relapse; it seems we don't automatically know. Here are my thoughts.

Dear Friends and Family,

When I'm not feeling well, when depression has me in its grip, I may not be very fun to be around. I will not act like myself. I may ignore your phone calls, isolate myself, and even push you away. It's not because I don't love you, rather it is because I don't love, or even like, myself.

When depression takes over, I may be more helpless, hopeless, and pessimistic. I may not be able to concentrate, and it might take me forever to make a decision, if I make one at all. My intrusive thoughts may make paying attention to anything you say nearly impossible. Showering, cooking, cleaning, and necessary errands may be neglected. I may not be able to work, and paying the bills, if I can muster the energy to attempt it, will become challenging and stressful. I may look okay on the outside, but I feel absolutely nothing on the inside. This is more painful than words can express. When I am sick with depression, my world becomes an overwhelming, dark, chaotic place, and I may just want to hide.

Depression is confusing. When my symptoms are at their worst, I may sleep too much or not enough. I may be tired all the time or unable to settle. I may eat everything in sight or nothing at all. I may be able to follow through with scheduled appointments or unable to get out of my house. And I never know from one day to the next what my capabilities will be. It makes it very challenging to plan anything. So I'm not trying to be difficult, I just don't know in advance if I will have the energy to do whatever it is you've asked.

Please understand. Depression tells me I am useless, hopeless, and not fit to remain on this planet. It reminds me I will never amount to anything, no matter how hard I try, so why bother trying. Depression tells me I'm ugly, and fat, and not as good as you or anyone else. It makes me self conscious. It distracts me so much, I may not be able to follow your conversation, and I certainly won't remember it tomorrow! Depression makes me feel stupid. Can you understand now why I'm not myself? Why I'm not easy to be around? I have to work extra hard to hold up my end of our relationship. Despite what may appear, I really don't want to lose you.

What can you do to help? I'm so glad you asked. Pretend I have cancer or any other debilitating illness. Just remember I have an illness, too. And like cancer, I may have periods of wellness followed by relapse followed by wellness again. It will pass, but I may feel unfamiliar with that fact. It's okay to gently remind me, but try not to pound it into my head. Don't dismiss what I'm going through. It may be invisible to you, but it is ever so real, and debilitating to me.

There are simple things you can do. If I'm isolating, offer to sit with me. Don't expect me to be a great conversationalist, but just sitting with me will reduce my isolation. Send me a card or flowers, even, especially if I'm in the hospital. Remind me you're there, offer assistance, validate how I'm feeling, but don't force yourself on me. I just may not have the energy to go out for coffee, and that's okay. Let that be okay.

If I'm struggling, offer me something to eat. Fix dinner or bring over a casserole. Offer to mow my lawn, shovel the snow, or help with laundry. Do anything you would do for a loved one having difficulty caring for themselves due to any illness. It's simple really. I don't want you to be a hero. I may need help, but I don't need you to fix it. Continue to love me when I can't love myself, and know I will come out of this. Things will improve, and I'll be able to care for myself again. I will be ever so grateful for your kindness and help. And soon I will be myself again.

Thank you, friends and family. Thank you.