Have you seen the 2007 movie, The Bucket List, starring Morgan Freeman and Jack Nicholson? Did it make you think? Do you have a list? I do. Long before the movie I had a things-to-do-before-I-die list. I'm thinking about this now because I recently watched a video of a woman with MS talking about her list. That led to a discussion with my boyfriend and now this post.

Like I said, I've had a list in my head for years and years. It's changed a bit from time to time. I've also crossed a few things off already, like running The Boston Marathon and traveling to Australia. Most of my list, however, has remained consistent and intact over these many years. But it's always remained in my head. For some reason, I've never actually written my list down.

Perhaps I've just never taken the time to write out my bucket list. Perhaps I've neglected to write it down out of fear. Maybe the written word forces me to be accountable to myself. If it's only in my head, if I don't tell anyone, it's much simpler to walk away from the goals, to pretend they never existed. I guess there's less chance for disappointment that way.

I think it's time for me to write out my bucket list. These are some of the things I want to do during my lifetime. I am free to add to or subtract from this list at any time, of course, but for whatever reason, I now feel the need to put it out there. And what better place than here? After all, writing this blog was somewhat of a bucket list item (see #1).

The List:
1. I want to be a voice for those with depression and to reduce the stigma surrounding mental illness.
2. I want to write a book.
3. I want to jump out of an airplane (on my list since the age of 7).
4. I want to climb a mountain.
5. I want to hike to the basecamp of Mt. Everest.
6. I want to travel to and volunteer in Africa.
7. I want to compete in and finish an Ironman Triathlon.
8. I want to travel to Antarctica.
9. I want to remain sober, one day at a time.
10. I want to be a competitive runner into my 80's.
11. I want to take a WWII historical tour through Europe.

That's it for now. I may be forgetting something. That's the problem with keeping the list in my head for all these years. But I think this list is a pretty good representation of my desires. Several of them may never be realized purely out of lack of finances, but I didn't want to let that stop me from acknowledging them. It's a list of desires, not a list of likelihood.

Most of the goals on this list are within my grasp. I know I can do anything I set my mind to do. I know that. Even the Ironman, which I already would have conquered if I could conquer my fear of open water. That's a big one, because I know it will be scary and tough, but I also know it is totally doable. I just have to set my mind to it.

What's your list? I challenge you now to write it down. Make it real. I actually feel good, maybe relieved, now that I've shared it. I'd love to hear if you took me up on the challenge.