It's hard to believe it's July already. Summer has gone by so fast. My thoughts go out to all of you across the nation sweltering in this incredible heat. I am especially grateful today that I am able to stay cool inside my home, unlike many of you still without power after destructive weekend storms. I got up very early to run my speed workout this morning, but it made little difference, as it was already sticky hot outside. It was then that I said my prayer of thanks. I am lucky to have working electricity and a cool home. I can't imagine trying to live through this heat without at least a fan blowing the sticky air around. I'm saying prayers that power is restored soon to everyone currently without.

Like I said, it's hard to believe it's already July. I feel like I've missed the last two weeks with this lingering illness. But the pneumonia is clearing. I'm back on the road. There are only 14 weeks until my next marathon, so I'm trying to get back into training mode. I ran, for the first time in 10 days, on Saturday. It was hot! But I think the heat actually helped my lungs. I made it almost 5 miles. I probably could have gone further, but I didn't want to push it. Fortunately, I recovered quite nicely.

In fact, I recovered so well, I went for a 20 mile bike ride on Sunday. Again the heat was almost unbearable, and I baked in the sun. At least I created my own breeze while slicing through the sticky air on my bicycle. My legs were tired by the end, but my lungs felt more clear. It was a good ride.

I took a rest day yesterday and focused on work instead. That went well. I'm getting a little quicker with my documentation and utilizing more rusty skills which used to be second nature. This morning, before the sunrise, I got back on the track for a tough, new speed workout. It was a step-down workout of 1200, 1000, 800, 600, and 400 meters, with each successive repeat run at a faster pace than the one before. With only 200 meters of rest between each repeat, it was a challenging track session. As usual, I was quite pleased with hitting my paces and completing the workout, especially considering the recent pneumonia.

When I got home from the track, I took Puck for a quick walk. Yesterday's temperatures and humidity were so high, it was too dangerous to walk him. He enjoyed being out so early in the day, and I'm quite pleased to have gotten both my run and his walk already out of the way. I doubt I'll spend much time outside my lovely, cool home for the rest of the day. I'm looking forward to a productive, restful day inside. Happy day, everyone!