I got a note today from someone at nursingschools.net informing me that they featured my blog in an article about depression blogs. It's always surprising when my little blog gets recognized like this, and I am very honored. I appreciate nursingschools.net support, and I am glad they are doing their part in getting the word out about this illness.

In other news... I ran a race last night. It was a 5K cross country race at a nearby golf course. I thought long and hard about running it because I really don't care for it. This race hurts. There is a very vertical hill about 400 yards into the race, which is where the pain begins. There are 3 or 4 short, steep hills and 3 or 4 long, gradual hills interspersed throughout the course, so the hurting doesn't end until the finish. It's a bit brutal.

Knowing that I wasn't in the best shape, and keeping in mind the difficulty of the course, I decided I wouldn't race all out. It didn't matter. It still hurt. And I think I ended up going as fast as I could anyway. I was disappointed with my time, which averaged just over 8 minutes per mile, but I shouldn't have been. I knew I wasn't in racing shape. I should have just patted myself on the back for getting out there at all. But alas, my perfectionism struck again!

Perfectionism is a dangerous trait for someone with depression. Sometimes, I think, perfectionism has kept me in my low spots longer, because I expected so much from myself--even though I felt like crap! I've worked hard to keep those perfectionistic thoughts at bay when I've felt low, and I think I've been fairly successful. I've learned to allow myself space and accept where I'm at where my depression is concerned. If only I could allow myself space and accept where I'm at where my running is concerned! Like I said in my last post, I'm a work in progress.

Tomorrow during my long run, perhaps I'll keep Henry van Dyke's words in mind: Use what talents you possess; the woods would be very silent if no birds sang except those that sang best. Carry on, my friends!