I started this blog on January 8, 2008, with a poem, called I have depression. If you've read it, you probably noticed the lines, I am not depressed. I have depression. Sound familiar? One of the problems with the perception and acceptance of depression as a biological, treatable illness, as well as the stigma surrounding this illness stems from the word itself. Depression. It is a common, everyday word with common, everyday usage and meaning. Or is it?

From Merriam-Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary:
depressed adj (1789): 1: low in spirits: SAD; specif: affected by psychological depression...

depression n (14c):...2: an act of depressing or state of being depressed: as a: a depressing down: LOWERING b (1) : a state of feeling sad: DEJECTION (2) : a psychoneurotic or psychotic disorder marked esp. by sadness, inactivity, difficulty in thinking and concentration, a significant increase or decrease in appetite and time spent sleeping, feelings of dejection and hopelessness, and sometimes suicidal tendencies c (1) : a reduction in activity, amount, quality or force (2) : a lowering of vitality or functional activity...

I have been speaking publicly about depression for at least 5 years. One of the main points of every single talk I give is this:
Depressed is a feeling.
Depression is an illness.

Despite making that point a thousand times, this is actually the first time I've looked it up! Phew! Webster's confirms it! Depression is a noun. It is a state of being. Depressed is an adjective. It describes the state of being. In other words, it is a feeling, and therein lies the problem.

Everybody on the planet has been depressed! Just as everybody's been happy, sad, angry, or frustrated, all of our family and friends have been depressed. Therefore, our well-meaning (usually) family and friends think they know what it is we are experiencing! A person without a cancer history wouldn't think to comfort a friend with cancer by saying, "Well, when I had cancer, all I did was..." because she never had cancer, and she understands she has no idea what the cancer patient is experiencing! However, that same person, assumes he can comfort his friend with depression because he's been depressed before. Hell, everybody's been depressed at some point in time, right?

Right. Almost everyone has experienced feeling depressed. When I ask students if they've ever uttered the words, "Ugh, I'm so depressed today," every hand in the classroom goes up. When I follow that question with, "Yup, me too, but I'm not depressed today," I get self-satisfying quizzical looks. Then I say, "But I still have depression today." After that statement, usually 1 or 2 light bulbs flicker in the eyeballs before me. By the end of my talk, I make sure all of the light bulbs are aglow. Depressed is a feeling. Depression is an illness--a biological, treatable, mental illness, which unfortunately shares its nomenclature with a very common feeling.

I never say, "I am depressed." When I talk about my illness, I talk about my symptoms. I talk about how I am feeling about my symptoms. I talk about my mood. I talk about my thinking. I tell my doctors about my eating, sleeping, fatigue, exercise, concentration, aches and pains. I never say, "I am depressed." I am not depressed. I have depression.

And by the way, depression sucks.