I'm doing something unusual today. I wasn't planning it, but this morning I decided it was the right thing to do and the right time to do it. I'm taking a day off. From running, that is. Even though I was scheduled to run 7 up-tempo miles today, I decided to take the day off.

I've been feeling really depleted lately. I had two terrible runs this past weekend. On Saturday, I struggled mightily through 14 miles. I felt horrible. After just 6 miles my legs were totally gassed. I felt as if I was running the last 6 miles of a marathon. On top of that, my breathing was quite labored. My pace was slow, yet I had to stop and rest multiple times, especially in those last few miles. It was all I could do to finish.

Sunday's 7-miler wasn't much better. I was motivated to go, and mentally felt up to it. I purposefully slowed my pace significantly, and I actually felt okay for the first couple miles, but then I knew. It was going to be another struggle to finish, and it was, despite the adjusted pace. The same aches, fatigue, and breathlessness frustrated me. I was relieved I didn't have a run scheduled for Monday.

Instead of a run, I had my kettlebell and suspension training class last night. I felt good walking into class, but after the instructor took us through a brief warm-up my legs were screaming. Yes, everybody else was tired, too, but my legs were too fatigued for the minimal warm-up we had just completed. Fortunately, the rest of the class was filled with learning new moves which were focused on the upper body and core. My legs weren't taxed significantly again.

That brings us to this morning. I was too tired getting out of bed. Even after I got up I wanted, needed to lie back down. I was also dreading my run. I was worried about feeling like crap again. I didn't want that. I didn't need the discouragement. So, in a very rare moment of clarity, I made the decision to take the day off. And I immediately felt relief.

Don't get me wrong. I questioned the wisdom of my inaction many times throughout the day, especially when the sun came out and the air warmed beautifully. But I have to admit, my body is showing signs of overtraining. This surprises me, because I have not done enough to be overtrained. I've trained much, much more seriously and heavily many times in the past.

If it's not overtraining, though, what is it? I feel depleted. It makes me wonder if there is something physically wrong. Just in case, I began taking a multivitamin. I'm eating more iron and protein, vegetables and fruits. I'm taking my naps. I'm being kind to myself. Hopefully this will work itself out.

I have my weight-training class again tomorrow, so that will be three consecutive days of no running. I'm anxious to see how I'll feel when I start up again on Thursday.