As you may or may not know, I am currently on medical leave from my current position as a home health physical therapist. I love working in home health. I love the flexibility, the motivated patients, the control over my schedule. Unfortunately, I work in a start-up office, which carries with it the stress of fluctuating hours and patient volumes. As you may remember, in the span of two weeks earlier this year, I went from not having enough patients to sustain my employment to having more patients than two therapists could handle. The constant change and variability are not good for my mental health. My doctor, social worker, and friends all think I need to get something more stable in order to keep my mental health stable. I agree.

Over the past couple of months, I've checked out some other opportunities as they've come available. Interestingly, both of the opportunities I've checked into have come calling this week. Both potential positions are in nursing homes. Nursing home work is not my favorite, but it's not the worst place to work either. One nursing home is here in town, the other is in a small town about 20 minutes from here. I would be the only therapist, with one assistant, at each facility. Each position is part time, similar to the schedule I currently work. After some negotiating, one facility agreed to match my current salary, the other nearly matched it. And now I have a dilemma. I have two viable job offers, and I can't figure out which one to take!

I know I am in a unique position. It's nice to be wanted. But I'm stuck as far as which one is the better option! Both potential jobs would simplify my life. I would be joining long-term, stable rehab staff at either facility. One is close to home, the other a little further away. Neither is perfect. Perfect would be too easy! Not that I'm complaining! I'm not! This is just so strange! I have a job I like, which I don't necessarily want or need to leave, but simplifying my life would be advantageous. And I have two potential employers banging on my door! I don't know what to do.

I don't know what I will do. I've been honest with all involved, although my current employer does not yet know I am likely going to quit. That's on tomorrow's agenda. I've told the two potential employers I need at least 24 hours to weigh my options before I make a decision. I'm on my way to dinner with friends. They've promised to help me with the pros and cons list. Hopefully, that's all it will take. I just don't want to make the wrong decision, but which one is "wrong?" Which one is right? I don't know. I don't know.