Things continue to go well here. I'm feeling well. I'm back to running. I'm working at least 3 days per week, and I'm staying on top of my bills, errands and chores. It's the simple things. When the simple things in life are actually simple I know I'm doing well. I'm stacking one good day on top of another. That may be boring for you to read, but it sure is cool to be experiencing it.

Today I had a very good run. It wasn't an easy run, but I'm so satisfied with accomplishing what I set out to do. I set out to run at least 10 miles. I know that may have been a foolish goal, as I haven't run that far in several weeks, but sometimes I'm foolish. What can I say?

It was crisp and clear when Jet and I set out this morning. Having run 7 miles without walk breaks a few days ago, I hoped to run at least that far before taking a short walk break today. In the beginning my legs were tired. My left knee was a little sore. My right achilles was a little tight. I was worried I had set my sights too high. Those aches and worries made for a challenging first few miles, but I persevered. I battled my brain and my fatigue, and things improved. I ran right through my 7 mile walk break. In fact, I ran right through my 10 mile goal. I finished one hour and forty five minutes after I started, and I ran a total of 11.5 miles. No walk breaks. I was smiling a very big smile when I arrived home.

I enjoy challenging myself. I seem to thrive when I have a goal for which to shoot. That's one of the reasons I run marathons. Aiming my running toward that long term goal gives me motivation and direction. And I need direction. Growing up as an athlete my workouts and practices were always geared toward a future goal. I doubt I will ever be someone who exercises just for the heck of it. There's nothing wrong with exercising for exercise sake, but I think I'd lose interest pretty quickly. I need a goal.

Today I set and met my goal. That felt good. The goal kept me going. I'm so glad to back running. Life is good. My goal tonight is to continue stacking one good day upon another. I hope you will, too.