It was beautiful outside. The air was cool, almost cold, against my skin as I set out in the morning twilight. I kept my head up and ears open as my muscles groaned awake. It was the first moments of my upcoming three hour journey. I settled in.

The beauty of the sky immediately drew my attention. Lavender, pink, and magenta feathered across the horizon foreshadowing the arrival of day's brilliant light. The air smelled of awakening. I inhaled deeply.

The squirrels, it appeared, had long been awake. Gathering, chasing, climbing and cavorting they barely noticed my passing. The crows, on the other hand, boisterously squawked and chased me from above. While the geese couldn't have cared less. Overcrowding the path, hissing as I approached, they forced me to dodge them rather than the other way around. I had to laugh.

Through the woods, morning dew dripped rhythmically from the trees. Startled by my presence, a beautiful deer interrupted his breakfast and leapt away. Soon my breathing matched my footsteps, and these were for a long time the only sounds in my ears.

Out of the woods, around the town lake, things changed. There was more dodging of hissing geese, which was contrasted by panicked quack, quack, quacking and quick flap, flap, flapping of running duck feet. A small herd of running ducks really creates quite a ruckus!

The lake was busy with morning exercisers by the time I arrived. In my two laps around, I practically exhausted myself just saying hello. A constant whirring sound puzzled me for a moment until I passed an inflatable finish line. The local women's road race was setting up for their run.

The busy lake gave way to a quiet neighborhood toward the end of my journey. I was surrounded by manicured lawns, flowers and shrubs. In between barking dogs and buzzing lawn mowers, I could actually hear the clinking of breakfast dishes and coffee cups, as windows were opened to allow the rare cool air inside.

Finally, my path took me around the golf course, within a few feet of several tees. The whoosh of clubs slicing through the air broke up those final miles. Shortly, I was back in my neighborhood. It was the way I left it. Quiet and serene, not yet, it appeared, awake. There were no dogs to greet me, no mowers buzzing, and nobody to whom I could say hello. Even the squirrels, it seemed, were on their morning break.

I slowed to a stop under the now bright sky. Tired and content, I walked up my drive. I sighed an audible sigh. It was the only sound. I smiled and went into my house.