I'm busy running pre-vacation errands and doing pre-vacation chores. I've gone shopping, mowed the lawn, done laundry and got my hair cut. I saw my therapist, delegated my patients to the other PT at work, and gave Puck a good brushing. He's so handsome! Tomorrow I'll work, pack, play my softball game, take a nap, and then we're off! I'm really excited to go. It will be nice to relax, take in the beauty, eat good food, and enjoy my time with my friends. This pre-vacation business will make way for some good, old fashioned relaxation.

Like I said, I had therapy today. We talked a lot about the triathlon, as this was my first meeting with my therapist since I finished it. She, like most of you, agreed that I need to work on being grateful for the effort, for finishing, and to focus less on my disappointment in the water. I'm working on it. As I, ironically, pointed out, focusing on the disappointment isn't getting me anywhere. (You see, I know this cognitively. It's just getting the rest of me to go along!)

My therapist and I also talked about how well I've been doing. It's been a good 9 or 10 months since my last significant dip into the darkness, and that episode was relatively short-lived. That's hard to believe. It's been at least two, maybe three, years since I was last hospitalized. In the first 4-5 years of this illness, I was in and out of the hospital often. Lastly, I'm going on five years of sobriety. At that, my therapist said something about time flying. Things have been good.

My therapist has been through most of this journey with me. It's rather strange to sit in her office now, sometimes with very little to say. I feel so grateful...words really cannot express my gratitude. How do I thank someone who's been so instrumental in my life? How is my thanks any different than the thanks she gets at the grocery store? You know what I mean? I'd like her to feel my gratitude. I can't just say, "Thanks." I'm going to have to think more about this. I'd like her to know how grateful I am. I don't know where I'd be today without her.

Hmmm...how did I get from vacation to that thought track?? I'm just going with what's flying through my brain tonight. Gratitude. I guess I'm feeling grateful. I have a therapist who's kept me, at various times, alive, functional, resilient, and/or composed. I have friends I love--friends who care about me, too. And I'm about to embark on a ten day vacation with those friends to a beautiful, restful place. Peace.