Yesterday was a strange day. I awoke feeling low, but I went to my AA meeting anyway. Perhaps that was a mistake, as I felt incredibly alone in that room full of people. On top of that, I had a discussion focused on how I used to use alcohol to fill the emptiness I used to feel, and how sobriety filled that hole, only to realize, as I walked out of the building, that I felt familiarly empty. I felt an aching hole in my heart, and I entered my vehicle in tears.

I drove home, even though I knew it was probably going to be very difficult, and perhaps unsafe, to be alone. A better decision would have been to turn right instead of left and drive to my friend Wendy's house. Alas, I made the decision to return home, and it was tough. The ache inside did not abate. There was a hole in my heart.

That incessant ache, usually a knock-out punch whenever I feel it, yesterday got me moving instead. I found a music station on my DirectTV, called Reality Bites, which appropriately plays some head-banging, angry music. I could not have turned it up much louder! With that as my background, I set about to clean my house. It hadn't been really cleaned since I first entered the hospital almost 8 weeks ago. And I got it done.

I thought I would take a nap after cleaning for 3 hours, but the combination of beautiful, sunny weather and heart-pounding music motivated me to put on my running clothes rather than my bed clothes. I was tired, my mood was low, my motivation to actually run even lower, but out the door I went anyway.

I ran. After 1.2 miles, my legs were complaining, and I wanted to stop. I kept going instead. Negative depression-related thoughts randomly bounced around my sick brain, but I kept running. Labored breathing and breathlessness made me want to give up. I'm not used to breathlessness. But I kept running instead. At 4 miles, I had the option of turning for home, about 1.5 miles away, or continuing around a small lake. Initially, I turned toward home, but I changed my mind and ran around the lake instead. Tired, breathless, and pleased, I arrived home with 8.25 miles under my belt.

Like I said, it was a strange day, filled with wildly divergent feelings and a variety of distracting activities, and I did end up driving to my friend Wendy's home after my run, as my brain quickly resumed it's sickness, but in the end, that aching, empty, hole was filled. I'm grateful for that.