             I think a good place to start would be telling y’all a little bit about me. So here is the compact version. I will get more in to certain times in my life, specific struggles, and all that in later posts. For now here is just a rundown of who I am and a bit of what I have gone through.

So let me start by introducing myself-
My name is Samantha Lou and I struggle with depression, anxiety, self-harm, alcoholism, some mild PTSD and suicidal thoughts.

I am currently in my early twenties. I am a Christian, was raised as such, and chose to follow that path for myself even as a teen and young adult. I was raised in a loving home by both my parents along with both biological and adopted younger siblings. I was allowed the choice to be home schooled after a short stent in public school. Which I jumped on, feeling that dealing with others was a waste of time and limited my education. Yes, I was a nerd… yes, I wore glasses… yes, I was teased. That aside I loved learning and tested in to college at 15, completing my General Associates Degree with a focus in Psychology by 18. I was also very involved in my church; I went to church camp every summer, attended youth group, served with the younger children on Sunday mornings. On top of that I was really, really involved in my co-ed scouting program, where I served on pretty close to every level at one point or another.  I liked taking on as much responsibility as I could, I always tried to be grown up and mature. It got really stressful. Around 17 I started having minor panic attacks and a serious problem with insomnia. My doctor, already knowing depression ran in both sides of my family, put me on a low dose of an mild anti-depressant. It seemed to help for awhile, until things in my life finally imploded.
One catalyst was with my oldest adopted sister. From about my age of 14 to 18 things got progressively more tense and violent with her in the house. She had a wide array of mental illness due to her birth parents; my parents did their best to give her a better life. However in the end the life we had to lead around her and her actions hurt us all individually as well as a family. By the time I was 18-19 my parents had to make an impossible decision.  They relinquished their rights to her, in order to save the rest of us, and she returned to the foster system. But during this time my home life, in my honest opinion, sucked! I didn’t ever want to be home, so I kept myself busy with college classes, church, and scouting. Though I was constantly surrounded by people I only let a small handful get close to me. I was insecure about the fact a little kid was constantly beating on me. I found it embarrassing, I was ashamed, I didn’t want to talk about it because how could anyone possibly understand. So I started shutting others out, not that I had a lot of people I let get close to me to begin with.
Another factor was a bad break-up with my high school sweetheart. We were 18 when he had proposed, to which I said yes. We had been inseparable since we met at 16. We planned to announce our engagement a week later on Thanksgiving to our families. However I came down with pneumonia that had me suck in bed on the big day. So when he called me to tell me he “changed his mind” and “just didn’t love me anymore” I was crushed. My health took a turn for the worst and I ended up in the hospital for a week.  I stayed sick most the winter, and ended up in the hospital again in January.
This was nearing my breaking point. Sick and feeling very alone I turned to my best friend for comfort. He was one of the few that I would talk to about my adopted sister, he was there for me during the breakup, and he visited me all winter, especially when I was stuck in the hospital. After my second release from my pneumonias revenge, he offers to come hang out one night. Naturally I told him sure. However just being released I was still very drugged up on all kinds of medicines which left me with in a haze, amped up my depression, and left me with some serious memory gaps. But that night I apparently said “yes” to something I normally would have said “no” too. He took advantage of the situation and my state of mind. I had bruises the next day and remember it being very, very painful. I also remember lying to my mother telling her how great it was… again I was ashamed that I had let it happen. And just like that my “best friend” was no longer a part of my life.
At this point I took a knife to my wrist, I don’t know why, or even where I learn this behavior  but I cut my wrist until I bleed. It wasn’t my first act of self-harm, which I will touch on more later, but it was the first time I “cut”. And honestly it scared the crap out of me, I didn’t want to die, but this is how people killed themselves, or so I thought. I went to my parents and they didn’t react well, I’m not sure how else I would have expected them to react though. When they asked the big WHY question, I simply said “because I’m so tired of hurting”. Which, naturally, made no sense to them. They took me to the local Crisis Resource Center and I was admitted as an adult, being freshly 18. I didn’t want to die, that’s not why I had cut myself, but being there I was wishing I could. I was so afraid and I felt so alone.
I went home the next day, saw a therapist once, and just learn to keep my self-harm habits a better secret. I simply went along with the same routine of not talking about my problems and pretending they didn’t exist. By the end of the year I had gotten in to a relationship that was somewhat controlling and not totally healthy.  The next year I moved in with that boyfriend to escape the troubles at home. And as I thought things were finally improving I was diagnosed with a migraine disorder and had to leave a job I loved to go on disability.
Eventually I married the man I was living with and found comfort in drinking along with him. So I drank, a lot, with my occasional cutting to deal with my pain. The acts of self-harm my husband was unaware of until 2 ½ years in to our marriage. It took an accident involving alcohol almost killing someone dear to me to get me to stop drinking. I choice I made that my husband refused to join me in. But in sobering up I started self-harming more. About a year later I miscarried my husband and I’s child the same day I found out I was pregnant. By this point our marriage was already rocky for several different reasons. A month later a few days after my 23rd birthday my husband went in to a drunken rage in which some heart breaking things were said. I went home to my parent’s house where he called screaming and swearing and told me he was divorcing me. I had been having suicidal thoughts for awhile at this point. Nothing I ever acted on or tried to carry out. However I was ready to be done. I wrote him a letter and this time when I took the knife to my arm I was trying to take my own life.
Thankfully my youngest brother came down to find me and my folks got me in to the CRC. I spent 24 hours in there and was then transferred to the suicide ward of a local psychiatric hospital. There I stayed for a full week, while they got me on a new antidepressant. I attended counseling, groups, did a lot of journaling, read my bible frequently, and prayed constantly. There is a lot I could say about my time in the Crisis Center and the Psyc. Hospital. But the key thing was, I had to be willing to open up, be honest about how I was feeling, and be willing to let them help me.
When I finally contacted my husband he had sobered up and promised to quit drinking. He also agreed that we need to do some serious marriage counseling. Promises that unfortunately were no upheld in the end. At the time being however, I took his word for it and agreed to return home to him at the end of my stay in the hospital.
Upon my release I started attending Celebrate Recovery, a Christ-centered recovery program.  Despite my time in the hospital and being in a recovery, I still feel in to old habits of cutting and self-harm. It wasn’t until that November what I finally made the commitment to stop self-harming. It was not an easy thing to try to give up. It was my most heavily relied upon coping skills for stress and my depression. And all though I was starting to do better it was a habit I had to really work hard to quit.
As I started to improve my husband slipped deeper in to drinking and his anger. By Thanksgiving the problems in our marriage had come to a head. When waking him from a drunken sleep he hit me and then proceeded to scream at me about it when I tried to talk to me. With the abuse from the teen years, violence in my home was something I could not, would not, put myself through again. I left and filled a report with the police. Although I knew abuse was a legitimate reason to fill for divorce I still struggled greatly with that choice. Especially being a Christian woman, but that is another topic for another time. In the end we divorced. As heartbreaking as it was, it was the right thing to do for me own mental health. In leaving what had gradually become a emotionally, verbally, and finally physically abusive relationship I spared myself a lot of future pain, stress, and anxiety.
So I packed up and moved home at 23 years old. By this point the abusive adopted sister had long been out of the picture. Home was once again a place of peace. I had made it my goal to work on my own self-improvement as well. I was on a better anti-depressant that really helped me push through the crippling sadness. I have been sober for a year and a half. And an even more seemingly impossible goal I met has been being self-harm free for 6 straight months.
Besides just my recover program I was trying to get more involved in other parts of life. I met with my therapist regularly to work through my issues and insecurities instead of pretending nothing was wrong. I started reconnecting with friends and trying to get out and do things I enjoyed again. I spent more time in prayer and trying to grow in my faith. I was finally starting to see the light at the end of the tunnel for the first time in years. I started to feel like myself again.
There was something still bothering me though. I knew of at least one good friend of mine had also been a cutter in high school, but we never talked about it. After my suicide attempt my family and I never really talked about it. I got tattoos to cover up my scars that I wore in shame. In fact most people had not idea I dealt with depression or that I ever self-harmed. I was always so cheerful and positive. I was really, really good at fake happy. And heaven forbid I talk about the fact that just months before I had tried to kill myself. We are okay to read books, watch TV shows, and listen to music about it. But no one wants to talk about the real deal.
I realized there was something seriously wrong with that picture. So I started trying to open up dialogues with friends and family. Problem is these topics tend to make people really uncomfortable. But in one of these conversations I had a dear friend confess to me that she knew I cut, because she was a cutter too. When I asked her why she never said anything she shrugged and replied “I don’t know, because it is super personal?”
          But is that really a good enough reason to avoid talking about something so important? No! We could have talked all through high school and tried to support each other. I am guilty of the same silence though. I knew what the scars on my best friends arms were, I never talked to her about it. I took her excuses as to how she got them as it was not my business. So I didn’t say anything more on them for almost 10 years. And that brings us back to why I started “Depression” & Other Bad Words. As a source of information, awareness, support, a way to open up some dialogue, even just a way to say “Hey, you aren’t alone”. Because you are NOT alone.
~Samantha Lou