I'm feeling overwhelmed today. I think I've got too much going on. My head is trying to keep everything straight, but I feel like I'm running in a million different directions. I have lists of things to do, things to look up, things to buy, errands to run, people to call, and chores to be done. On top of that, I'm in the midst of the most difficult, and time consuming, week of my triathlon training. It's all getting to be a bit too much.

I'm worried about work. Tomorrow I have a "Start of Care" to do. That means I will be the first provider from my agency to meet with a new patient. Most of the time the nurses are the first ones into the home, and I come along later. But tomorrow it will be me, and it will be the first time I'll be doing a start of care. It's a very lengthy process. I'm told it takes at least 1.5 hours in the patient's home and then another 2 hours of paperwork. So I'm stressed about that.

I'm also stressed about my remodeling project, which hit a major snag today. My plumbing rough-in failed inspection. It didn't just fail. It failed miserably. It needs to be torn out and re-done. Does anyone know a good plumber? This means more work, more time, and most unfortunately, more money for me. We're just getting started and already the dollars are adding up. This is not a hopeful sign.

Despite having to wait for the plumbing inspector for three hours, I did get my workouts in today. I started my day early with a strength training class, but I didn't get on my bike until after 4 PM. I did a brick workout. I rode for 60 minutes followed by an immediate 30 minute run. It went okay. My legs were very tired on the bike, and I had some cramping in my calves during my run--not typical for me. Not sure what that was all about. Maybe it was the stress wearing me out.

Looking ahead, things don't get any simpler. I'll be up and in the pool early tomorrow because after work I have a golf lesson followed by a softball game! I'm not sure when I'll squeeze in the run. There are a few too many things on my plate at the moment. I'll really have to work on staying in the moment and taking things one day at a time. Looking ahead is too overwhelming. I need to stop doing that. One moment at a time, right? Taking just one moment at a time will eventually get me through...I think. I hope.