I'm still getting back into life after The Boston Marathon. It always takes me a bit of time to get back into a routine after traveling. Speaking of Boston, I'm still recovering from the marathon. That fact alone tells me I didn't have enough training under my belt prior to the race. I'm still feeling fatigue and soreness in my legs almost one week later, whereas I typically recover within a few days. I guess I shouldn't be surprised. Missing over 4 weeks of training had to have an impact.

I am planning on increasing the intensity of my training beginning this week. I know I had planned to take time off to let my left achilles tendonitis heal, but I just can't do it. I'll keep treating it, but I've already gotten back on the road. I had a nice, quick 12 mile run yesterday. Like I said, my legs were still a little sore, but running a quick pace, after slogging through Boston, felt refreshing.

Besides returning to my running schedule, I plan to increase the intensity of my cross-training as well. I'll continue to use swimming and walking on recovery days, but I've got to get back into the weight training and biking on the other days. I haven't been able to consistently weight train since my knee surgery last October. I felt that lack of strength training during Boston.

I finally have full range of motion of my right knee now, so returning to my cable training class, for example, should be okay. I think I returned to it too early last month, which is why I ended up re-injuring my knee. I'll test out my knee in class tomorrow morning. By returning to strength training class, I hope to regain another routine.

My mood remains good. I was prepared to fight off the inevitable drop after the excitement of traveling and the marathon, but so far so good. I haven't had the typical drop. I haven't totally gotten back into my routine, but my mood is stable. I'm on guard, waiting, but also feeling more confident every day that I'll be okay. I'm grateful for that. Now for the next marathon challenge...