This morning I sat in a Mayo Clinic dental specialty chair for 2 hours and 15 minutes while two doctors cut, drilled, scraped, hammered (yes, hammered), and sewed a high tech new bone slurry into place. It was the first step in what will hopefully turn into new, supportive bone in my jaw in order to allow placement of a canine implant at a later date. Now it's up to my body, and all I can do is wait. Prayers please that solid new bone forms within the next 5 months.

If new bone does not form, I will have to undergo another procedure and wait another 5 months. I'm hoping to avoid that result, but ultimately I have no control. What will happen will happen. I'm hopeful my decent physical condition and overall good health will be of benefit right now. Like I said, if you've got a direct line to a higher power, feel free to use it and use it often. Thanks.

The surgery itself was uncomfortable and long, but it wasn't terrible. They had to re-numb various parts of my mouth at least 3 times. At one point I could feel the stitches being stitched into the roof of my mouth. That wasn't so fun. I tried to tune out and listen to some music, but my phone died about halfway through the procedure. Oh well. The doctors were wonderful and did their best to keep me comfortable.

I've been home for several hours now, and I'm doing better than I expected. I'm taking antibiotics to keep away infection, steroid pills to control the swelling, and of course, pain pills. I have stitches in my gums, my palate, and in between my teeth which run from canine tooth to canine tooth. It's a large area. But so far the pain and swelling aren't too bad. I'm surprised and grateful for that.

It's going to be a long weekend. I can't do any physical activity or eat anything that requires chewing for 4 days. I bought some protein powder for smoothies and some potatoes for mashing. And since the doctors say rest, that's exactly what I'm going to do. It's a good thing I have 3 new movies to watch and a host of football games to keep me occupied this weekend. I certainly don't want to do anything that may jeopardize my healing. I'll practice being a good patient. This too shall pass.