I'm about 20 minutes away from missing my usual Saturday morning meeting because I just couldn't wake up this morning. Puck woke me up exceptionally early to go outside, and from that point on I couldn't get any restful sleep. I don't like missing my meeting, but skipping every once in awhile won't kill me.

Actually, I'll be attending a special AA meeting tonight. It's cake night. Cake night celebrates everyone who had an anniversary in the previous month. We each get a cake presented to us. I chose my friend Cindy to present mine. Not only is she a terrific friend, she was instrumental in getting me to AA and starting me on my sobriety trip. The meeting is open to all family and friends, and it can often get quite emotional. It's a nice time for us to acknowledge the people who've stuck with us or helped us in recovery.

Unfortunately, I also have another commitment tonight! Go figure. I rarely have anything going on, and tonight I have two important events at the same time! The track club banquet is tonight. This is an annual social event with dinner, speakers, and awards. We also vote on club board members. I happen to be running for one of the open board positions. In addition, I'm due to get my award for winning my age group in the Grand Prix race series. It's a big night, but I'm going to miss most of it. I'll have to leave cake night early if I hope to hear any of the speaker or to arrive in time for the awards. However, cake night may be so nice, I may choose not to leave. It's frustrating. I'd like to be at both events at the same time.

Whichever event I attend, I should be in damn good shape! Today, I have a long challenging workout for my triathlon class. My schedule calls for me to swim a long, tough interval workout. It includes lots and lots of kicking--just kicking. I hate kicking! By the time I reach the middle of the pool, all my momentum stops! No matter how hard I kick, it seems I go nowhere! It sucks! I may cheat and bring my flippers. After swimming more than 1300 yards, I'll ride the bike for 60 minutes. Boring! I'll be at the gym for at least two hours, I'm sure. I guess I better get going!

On the job front, I didn't get any answers yesterday from my potential new employer. She hadn't looked into any of the "details" we were supposed to be working out, and she actually put me off until next week. She apparently needs to consult with her big boss to get approval for some of the things I need in order to leave my current position. So no news on whether or not I have a new job. I'll keep praying about it. I have faith it will work out as it's supposed to work out. As soon as I know anything, I'll let you know.

Now, I better finish my coffee, get off my butt and get busy! Have a great day!