The applause was loud and long, and there were a lot of smiles and hugs afterward, so I guess my little talk about "Gratitude in Action" went well last night. I was quite relieved when it was over. I usually have no problem speaking in front of people, but last night I was nervous the whole way through. Oh well, like I said, my talk was well received and the feedback was really great.

Nice feedback is always good for my mood, but my mood has been good anyway. I'm actually feeling really good. Things seem to be entirely back to normal from that little dip I had about one month ago. It's nice to be able to focus on life and not have to battle my mind again.

The focus of my life these days is a bit narrow. Work and train. Train and work. Today I did a difficult 2 hour workout. The first hour was a very tough interval workout in the pool. I followed that with a more relaxed hour on the bike. Tomorrow I have a tough hill workout on the treadmill before going to work. Like I said, train and work. Work and train.

I prefer a challenging treadmill workout to what I had to do in the pool today. There's still a big difference between a tough pool workout and a challenging land workout for me. In the pool, when I get short of breath, I panic slightly--after all, I can't just pant uncontrollably like I can outside. I still have to maintain that damn rhythmic breathing or drown. I guess that's what I'm afraid of--drowning. I tolerate burning lungs much better outside than I do in the pool.

After burning my lungs for a couple hours this morning, I attended my usual AA meeting, filled my stomach, and then went back to sleep! I was tired! I guess I should have said my life focus these days is working, training and sleeping! But then again, I've needed a ton of sleep ever since this depression began. It's nice that I am now physically tired for a reason other than depression. Really nice.

Here's something to think about: Do you want to know who you are? Don't ask. Act. Action will delineate and define you. --Thomas Jefferson