Wow. Thanks for all the great comments on my last post. Today's post should be much more upbeat. I've been focusing on living in the moment and looking toward the future rather than lamenting the past.

I'm continuing to train for Boston. In fact, yesterday I went back to the early morning weight-training class I used to regularly attend. I hadn't attended it since my knee surgery in October. It starts at 5:00 AM, so it takes a commitment to get there. I was happy to be there yesterday, although my knee was a little sore afterward. I like that class because we work our muscles while also working cardiovascularly. It's a nice compliment to running.

Speaking of running, I had a decent long run of 12 miles on Saturday. It's still much harder than I'd like it to be, but I'm trying to be patient. It just sucks to start over! Today was actually a better day. I had a great speed workout. I ran 10 by 400 meters (1/4 mile) fast. Each fast interval took me around 1 minute 40 seconds, and I rested about 2 1/2 minutes between each interval. It was tough, but I felt like my old self for just a little while. That was nice. Hopefully, that means my long run this weekend, 14 miles, will also feel easier.

I saw my psychologist today. We agreed this most recent depression relapse was the worst of my depression "career." We were discussing such things because I told her how I've been feeling cautious lately. Maybe mistrusting is a better way to describe what I've been feeling. While I'm trying to stay in this moment, I find it difficult to trust that this latest episode is truly over. I find myself waiting for the other shoe to drop. That's not a good feeling, but so far there are no shoes littering my floor. I'm grateful for every "normal" moment. I'll try to quit looking over my shoulder.

That's all I've got for today. Things continue to go better. I'm working my regular schedule. I'm getting out a little more. I'm taking care of more daily tasks. And I'm exercising in the ways of which I was previously accustomed. I pray I continue walking this gentle path.