I'm in tears. I had a good day up until about one hour ago. It's a gorgeous day here. I slept late. I mowed my lawn. I did my strength circuit followed by a 40 minute swim at the gym. I went to McDonald's for my iced caramel latte, and then I was off to Best Buy to purchase a new computer router. Things were going good.

As I was heading north toward Best Buy, I spotted a dead (or so I thought) animal in the right hand shoulder of the 6 lane divided freeway on which I was driving. Just as I approached the animal, going 65 miles per hour, it lifted it's head and weakly crawled toward the road. It was a bloodied cat, and it was alive and clearly in pain. I covered my mouth in horror, as I cursed the owner for letting a cat freely wander so close to a major thoroughfare. Tears came to my eyes as I exited the freeway. Could I leave that cat there to suffer and die? I pulled into the Best Buy parking lot, took a deep breath, and headed back toward the freeway.

It took about ten minutes to get to the cat. He was still shallowly breathing, but as I scooped him up in one of Puck's dog towels, he did lift his head. I placed him on the floor of my car and talked to him the whole way to the emergency vet hospital. Unfortunately, the hospital doesn't open until 5 PM, and it was only 3:30. A kind woman directed me to the nearest vet office, and we were off. I couldn't find the office, so I phoned for directions. I told the receptionist I was coming in with an injured cat, which I had just rescued, and she said, "Okay, but you'll have to stay if you bring him in." Weird.

By the time I arrived at the large vet clinic, at least one half hour had passed, and who knows how long the cat laid there before I came along. The receptionist quickly put all of my contact information into the computer while two vet assistants rushed off with the cat. At this point it was becoming clear that they were expecting me to pay for any services rendered. The receptionist confirmed this when she told me, "Anyone who brings an animal in is responsible for payment." I said, "Look, I just wanted to bring the cat to someone who might be able to save him or at least put him out of his misery. I'm not prepared to pay a large bill. I love animals," I said, "but I'm not rich." She said she understood, ushered me into a treatment room, and excused herself to go talk to the vet.

At this point, I was crying. The trauma of rescuing the cat caught up with me. I could hardly speak when the receptionist came back and told me they would wave 80 dollars of the $122 cremation fee. Would I be willing to pay the remaining $42? I said, "I guess." I couldn't comprehend what was happening. Were they going to try to save the cat? Would they only try to save it if someone was willing to pay for saving it? What would they do if I refused to pay--throw it back into the street? It was really surreal, and I became angry through my tears.

I couldn't believe what was happening. Aren't vets supposed to care about animals? Do all of their decisions revolve around money? I realized they were running a business, but how often did a rescued, wounded animal come through their doors? The trauma of rescuing this cat was quite enough. I didn't need their money-hungry brow-beating on top of it!

In the end, I walked out while saying something about trying to be a good citizen, and that they could send me to collections if that's what they needed to do. I have no idea what they're planning to do with the cat. I expect I will get a bill for whatever it is they decide. I don't know yet whether or not I will choose to pay it. I think I probably sealed the poor guy's fate by walking out the door. I'll never know whether or not he could have been saved. I left with a really bad taste in my mouth.

Crying and angry, I drove home and wondered if there was a lesson in this situation. Unfortunately, the only lessons I thought of were negative ones. Don't get involved. Don't try to help. Ignore suffering. Money is more important than life. Did they think this was really my cat, and I was just trying to get free care? Are we that suspicious and mistrusting these days? And what about the hundreds of other cars who drove by this suffering animal without a thought? Maybe, in the end, they were smarter than I. I don't know. I don't know.

Right now, I wish I hadn't stopped. Actually, that's not true. I wish I hadn't seen the cat move. Once I saw that, I couldn't have lived with myself if I had ignored it. But what price (and I mean emotional price) will I pay for my actions? I've stopped crying...but I'm still angry and confused. What's the lesson here?