I'm about 24 hours post-op right now. My right knee is very, very sore. I've not yet been able to put more than a few ounces of weight on my leg and bending my knee is still out of the question. I wasn't quite prepared for this level of discomfort. Ice and pain meds have been crucial.

The good news, and the odd news, is that my lateral meniscus was totally intact. My doctor and I were both surprised. Rather than a lateral meniscus tear, as we had thought, I had a totally screwed up patella-femoral joint. That's the joint between the knee cap and the femur. The joint surfaces were very rough. They're supposed to be as smooth as glass. There were bone spurs on my patella. The cartilage was torn up. And strangest of all, I had a hunk of scar tissue sitting right in the joint space. Yet I had NO patella-femoral joint pain! All of my pain was posterior and lateral. Patella-femoral pain should occur right under the knee cap. My doctor said he'd only seen such a thing once or twice before in his many years of practice. What can I say? I guess I'm unique.

My doctor fixed me up. He smoothed out the roughened joint surfaces, removed the damaged cartilage and bone spurs, and excised the scar tissue. He then performed microfracture surgery. In microfracture surgery, holes are drilled in the bone surface down to the layer of bone marrow. He drilled holes in my femur. The holes allow growth factor and blood circulation to reach the outer bone surface which regenerates the cartilage. If the procedure works, new cartilage will fill in the gaps created by removing the damaged cartilage. The recovery may take a little longer, but hopefully I'll be able to run painfree in the end.

I'm optimistic. Since surgery, I've done a lot of reading and watched some YouTube videos about microfracture surgery. Several athletes have had positive results and returned to their sports after having the surgery performed. That's all I want. I want to return to my sport.

Hopefully the pain will subside soon, and I can get on with moving and strengthening my knee. I'll be on crutches for at least one week. At that point, I'll follow-up with my doctor and learn more. Thank you for all of the prayers and well wishes. I really appreciated the support.