It was a three workout day yesterday, and I did it. Even though I'm still recovering from last week's illness, I had an unusual amount of energy. Maybe I'm actually getting in shape?? It was a great day.

I started out with my usual AA meeting before heading off to the gym for a cable class strength workout. Oh my God, the instructor worked us hard! It was great! My muscles were burning from the effort. It's so nice for me to have an instructor tell me what to do. I find I work a lot harder than I could ever manage on my own. I left the gym around 11 AM, treated myself to a caramel latte at McDonald's, and went home for lunch.

After letting my food settle for an hour, I was out the door with Puck by 1:00 for an interval run. My boy made it about halfway through the 37 minute run, but at least he didn't end up limping. It was a beautiful day. I tried to relax through the quick intervals while soaking up the sun during the relaxed running sections. The run went well, but I'd be lying if I said I wasn't worrying about the upcoming bike ride.

My quads were already tired when I mounted my bike at 4 o'clock. Thankfully, my friend Renee agreed to ride with me despite the fact that she'd already run 22 miles! She's nuts (and amazing)! I was grateful for the company. It's much easier to push through discomfort, or boredom, when I've got training partners. I confirmed that I'm still really weak going up hills, as Renee easily rode away from me on every one. Regardless, we had a really nice 21+ mile, 72 minute, ride.

After showering, I treated my parents to some good pizza. They're both sick right now, so I spent some time with them before heading back home for bed. Needless to say, I slept really well. I'm really pleased with what I did yesterday, although I'm not breaking my arm patting myself on the back yet. Today, I've got a 60 minute run followed by 2300 yards of swim intervals. My legs are tired, so I think it will be a little tougher than yesterday, but I'm still looking forward to it. After all, Monday is a rest day!

I do not think there is any other quality so essential to success of any kind as the quality of perseverance. It overcomes almost everything, even nature.--John D. Rockefeller