As planned, I had the big depression conversation with D this past weekend. In fact, I got it out of the way within a few hours of arriving. We were sitting together on the couch when I came out with it. And you know what? It didn't seem to be a big deal. He seemed to take it in stride.

The talk itself was relatively short. Mostly I talked, and he listened. I was expecting a lot of questions, but he only asked one which I remember. He wanted to know if I took medication. That's all. I wish he had asked a few more questions, actually. Answering questions would have allowed me to expand on the information I gave him. Instead he got just the basic outline of my story, nothing more.

I told him I've had depression since November, 2000. I told him I took medication. I told him I had been hospitalized for it. I told him fatigue was a lingering symptom and the primary reason I no longer worked full time. I explained that I'd been relatively stable for quite awhile, and I even told him about this blog.

Unfortunately, I didn't have the opportunity to tell him many details. I didn't tell him about the number of hospitalizations. I didn't tell him about the suicide attempts. I didn't explain other treatments I've had, like ECT. I didn't tell him about disability. And I didn't explain what depression had taken from my life. I felt like I left a lot out.

Perhaps what I told him was enough information for him for now. Perhaps that's why he didn't quiz me. He sat quietly, asked his one question, and that was about it. I had to be okay with that. He's a contemplative guy, and perhaps that's what he needed to do--contemplate.

Depression came up in normal conversation a few more times throughout the weekend, but that was it. I wanted to say more, but I decided to let it go. I figure it's out there now. Perhaps he will have more questions for me in the future. If not, I guess more of the story will slowly come out.

The good news is he didn't treat me any differently the rest of the weekend. Everything continued forward without a glitch. In fact, everything went great! Our relationship seems to be growing stronger with every moment spent together. It's nice. I'm happy. And I'm so relieved the depression conversation is now behind me.