I've had local people, people who know me, tell me, "I never realized depression could be like that," after they read this blog. The reality is, I have no idea who is and who isn't reading my blog. That's okay. That is both the blessing and the curse of writing a blog. The beauty of this comment is these people know me. They are friends, acquaintances or colleagues with whom I frequently share meals, runs, meetings, or work. They see me. They interact with me. They know me. But until they read my blog, they don't know my illness--not my illness, but the illness of depression. It's usually invisible.

Depression is invisible, as the above comment highlights. Surviving with depression requires us to adapt--to act our part expertly. The stigma, shame and myths surrounding mental illness create an environment of illusion. If we can't assimilate, we die. We are all great actors on the stage of life. We have to be, or we will be ostracized. The solitude, separation and loneliness are too high a price to pay to "keep it real." This is not to say I am someone other than the person I project. I am the person you run with, have meals with, and see at meetings. Social, cheerful, humorous, confident--that is me. But it is not all of me. The depression I keep unseen.

You do not see the ugly vacancy within my soul. The colluded, preoccupied, corrupt brain is invisible to you. The financial anxieties, self-care difficulties, and overwhelming fatigue I keep hidden. I have to, or life would be unlivable, lonely and bankrupt. It's not sad. I do not need sympathy. It just is. It's reality.

That's why I'm here writing reality. To make visible the invisible, that's my motivation. To give form to the amorphous, describe the indescribable, and give voice to the voiceless, that's why I write about depression. After reading my blog, perhaps one person will decide to get help. Maybe another will cook a meal for a friend. Maybe someone will donate money for research. Perhaps one will drive a friend to an appointment. Perhaps... I don't know who reads this blog, what impact is has, or if it motivates anyone to take action. Certainly, I hope my experience will enlighten, support and help others. That's always been a goal.

I'm grateful when people tell me my writing has enlightened them, changed their point of view, or made a difference in their life. I humbly appreciate that. However, I never anticipated the difference this blog would make in my own life. Unexpectedly, writing reality has helped me. Writing this blog helps me feel whole. Whole. For a person with depression, there is no better feeling than that.