     So let’s back up a post or two and actually talk about what depression is for a minute. Depression is often a term used in many ways from expressing sadness to talking about a mental health disorder. I am sure you have or at least know someone that has used the phrase “That’s depressing”. I have even used that phrase a time or two, myself.

The word ‘depress’ according to Merriam-Webster Dictionary is defined as-
Obsolete
To press down or to cause to sink to a lower position
To lessen the activity or strength of
Sadden, discourage
To decrease the market value of


     In this case we are going to focus on the emotional definition of depress. But first let’s look at the definitions of depressed and depression.

Depressed is defined as-

Low in spirits : Sad; especially : affected by psychological depression 

Depression is defined as- 

An act of depressing or state depressed, such as


A state of feeling sad : Dejection, anger, anxiety, and depression
A mood disorder marked especially by sadness, inactivity, difficulty in thinking and concentration, a significant increase or decrease in appetite and time spent sleeping, feelings of dejection and hopelessness, and sometimes suicidal tendencies
A lowering of physical or mental vitality or of functional activity


     I think Webster’s defines ‘depression’ pretty well. Even in the definition the difference between a saddened state and the mood disorder is expressed.

A state of being depressed
     Most people go through some state of depression during their life. It is a natural response to a tragedy or hardship. Something heartbreaking happens and you feel it for awhile until the overall state of being depressed eventually passes. Some people go through more than one, but the key factor here is that it does eventually pass. It is a temporary state.

Depression (Major Depressive Disorder)
     As expressed in its definition there is a mood disorder by the name of Depression as well. It is also known as Major Depressive Disorder, or sometimes referred to as Clinical Depression. It is defined by the Mayo Clinic as “a persistent feeling of sadness and loss of interest.” Affecting how you feel, think and behave. There can be difficulties doing your everyday activities. It can cause both physical and emotion issues, sometimes even leading to a feeling that life is not worth living. The key factor of the mood disorder of Depression is that it doesn’t just pass, you can’t snap out of it. This tends to be the hardest part for me to come to terms with. I will feel like I am being weak or that it’s something I should have more control over. Trains of thought that are NOT helpful when dealing with depression, just by the way. As Clinical Depression is treated with medication, therapy, or a combination of both.
   
     This fact that Depression is a treatable mood disorder can be a point of conflict for some. I know people from ever argument. Some feel like they can and should be able to get over it on their own. I know some who try to deal with it using all natural alternatives. I know a few who swear by their anti-depressants. And others that feel that medication is a government ploy or money making scheme. There are some that think it is all a matter of faith and needing to believe harder. A point I will argue as a Christian woman that, though I do not know why God let me have this disorder, I have faith He will use me and my depression to hopefully help others. I also believe that God created every one of the doctors and therapists with their God-given talents. So I personally see no issues in taking medicine or seeing a therapist or councilor.
     There is no cure for Major Depressive Disorder; this is something I will be dealing with for the rest of my life. It isn’t much different than learning you are a diabetic that needs insulin, or an asthmatic that needs to carry a rescue inhaler. I take medication for my depression, and I can honestly say it helps. What I am on helps me feel more like myself, it makes the overwhelming sadness manageable. And that is the whole goal, to learn how to best manage your Depression. On top of that I do also use some all natural alternatives like essential oils and meditation. I also see a councilor that I have been seeing for several years. When things are harder I go more often, when things are better balanced I go once a month as more of a check in.  In a later post I would love to get more in to therapy and counseling.
     I hope this helps clarify what Depression is and what it means. As well as giving a small glimpse of how it’s treated or managed. I know everyone will have their own plan for managing their depression; this is simply an example of mine. I urge you if you are struggling with depression, keep an open mind about treatments. Talk to your doctor about your options, they will help you figure out what’s best for you. If you don’t struggle with depression than I hope this helped give you an idea of what it is we deal with. Thank you all for reading.
~Samantha Lou