Jet and I had a great run this morning. I was scheduled for an 8-miler. My busy day dictated that I run early this morning. Unfortunately, it was gray and 36 degrees with a light mist, so I wasn't too enthusiastic when I stepped outside. My enthusiasm waned even more when the sky opened, and it began to pour just as I passed one mile. It was a cold, hard rain with occasional rumbles of thunder, which Jet really didn't appreciate. Rather than turn around and go home, after all I was already wet, I decided I'd at least run a few miles and finish on the treadmill later. But the cold, hard rain slowed to a sprinkle at my turn around point, mile two, so I decided to go ahead and finish my 8 miles.

Before we hit mile three, the sky opened again. It poured and poured and poured more cold, hard rain. I was far from home, so I decided I might as well continue. It was absolutely silly, so silly I began to laugh. Jet and I were alone in the city stomping through the rain. I'm sure people driving by questioned my sanity and maybe even wanted to rescue my adorably soaked dog. But instead of feeling sorry for myself, I enjoyed myself. It was fun! We ran through the downpour for over an hour. I was energized and ready for my day by the time we got home. It turned out to be a great run.

I like when I have unexpected experiences like that. It adds a little spice to my life. The day has remained cold, wet and gray, but I'm still feeling energized. My run in the rain really set the tone for the rest of my day!

The rest of my day has been filled with appointments, errands and a speaking engagement. I told my story to a group of students at the local college. As usual, I appreciated the opportunity to share my experience with depression. I'm not sure my story is all that interesting, but at least it's a first hand account of living with this sometimes debilitating illness. I think that's helpful for anyone learning about mental illness. And as is usual after I speak, I end up feeling full of gratitude for the experience. It's been a good day.