I'm spending the weekend in Madison, Wisconsin, with D. It should be fun. We are running a half marathon together tomorrow morning and then spending the rest of the weekend bumming around Madison. As usual it will be nice to see D and spend time with him, and the race is known to be well organized and fun. D's son will be joining us this evening for dinner, and he's also running the race tomorrow morning. I'm looking forward to a nice weekend away.

I don't know what kind of performance to expect, as I didn't really taper for this race. I altered my schedule a bit. I ran 10 miles twice this week, but I didn't do any speed work, and I did skip one of my kettlebell classes. I think I'll just run by feel again and try to enjoy the event. I'd like to run fast, of course, but I'll try not to freak out if I don't. My performance is not that important. Preparing for Twin Cities Marathon is the long-term goal. This weekend is more about having fun with D.

Overall, I'm still feeling pretty good. I was physically whipped earlier this week, but I've recovered from that. I think skipping my Wednesday night kettlebell class helped me recoup some needed energy. My mood seems okay. It could be better, but it's not in the pits. Things have been busy but smooth.

The only drama I currently face is Jet's upcoming surgery. I'm feeling quite ambivalent about putting him through it. He's not limping nearly as much as he was, and I'm not sure what to think about that. He's so joyous and spirited. I hate to be responsible for bringing him pain. I hate the thought of him having to be quiet and sedate for six weeks. It's going to be a real challenge, and I question whether it is worth it.

The problem is, I can't just put it off. This surgery is only done on very young dogs. It is not successful on older dogs, but younger dogs do benefit from it. So it's an either now or never decision, and I'm struggling with it. I'm leaning toward doing it, but I'm going to discuss it more in depth with the vet today. His surgery is currently scheduled for next Tuesday, the 20th. He'll have just turned 11 months old.

I'm going to leave you with a picture of my boy. He's sitting on my back deck with about 1/4 of his collection of sticks and toys. When I mow, I pick each of these up and place them on the deck. Jet thinks this is great fun! As quickly as I can set them down, he races to put each one back in the yard. Doesn't he look proud of himself? Have a great weekend, friends!