Perhaps it was a reference in a book written by a man dying from ALS, or perhaps it was the result of sitting at home in pain and/or ill for the better part of a week, or maybe it was seeing Peyton Manning finish off a difficult season with a Super Bowl win; I don't know the exact reason, but I've been thinking a lot this week about what it means to be a fighter.

I've been referred to as a fighter at various points along this journey I call life. But is that true? Am I a fighter? What exactly does that mean? I don't know. Let's look at the record.

I survived a difficult, abuse-riddled childhood which included several stints in foster homes, a prolonged battle with severe depression, a serious suicide attempt, and 90 days in a locked adolescent psych hospital, all while excelling in sports and school. Does that make me a fighter?

I went on to excel in college, athletically and academically, which I fully paid for with academic scholarships and regular part-time employment, but college was no picnic either. College is where my abuse of alcohol began to reveal itself, where I was date raped after accepting a ride home from a fellow athlete after an off campus party, and where I faced cruel bullying after other athletes raised questions about my sexual orientation. Fighter?

I moved far away from home, to the big city of Boston, after college and got my Master's Degree in Counseling Psychology. I worked in that field for five years prior to deciding to change my career and return to my home state in order to pursue my Master's Degree in Physical Therapy. Those 27 months were the most academically challenging of my educational journey, but also the most rewarding, and I got it done.

Life was good. My spouse and I bought our first house, traveled frequently, and developed meaningful relationships with a host of friends. Working full time as a physical therapist was everything I had hoped it would be. I could relax and breathe. But had I gotten to this point because I was a fighter?

It was five years into my career as a physical therapist when the depression returned. Two years and two hospitalizations later, depression began to strip me bare. First I lost my spouse. Shortly thereafter I lost my job, my house, and my financial independence. My life was turned upside down.

Depression continued like a wrecking ball through a crystal shop. I lost friends, my tenuous sobriety, and the ability to care for myself without assistance. For years I bounced from hospitals to treatment programs to adult foster care. Life as I knew it had disintegrated.

I was living an unrecognizable life. Yet despite years of intractable depression, another serious suicide attempt, and some very destructive, dangerous drinking, I somehow landed on my feet. Is that because I was fighting?

It's now 15 years later. I'm sober 10 years. I'm living in my own home, which I somehow managed to purchase in the middle of the chaos, and working part-time. I've restored relationships with family and developed new relationships with supportive friends and treatment professionals. I've felt a new, different sense of peace.

But life is definitely not easy, especially recently. Perhaps that's why I'm wondering about this fighter label. In the past year alone, I faced the worst depression relapse of the past 15 years, which knocked me flat for 3 months, and among other things, severely depleted my financial resources. I have yet to recover anything resembling financial security.

This past year, I also ended a four year relationship. Ironically, during the last weekend I spent with my boyfriend I tore my Achilles tendon. As a result, I have not been able to run since April, 2015. I missed 4 marathons, including New York City, but more importantly, I'm missing a huge piece of my identity.

Health has been a huge challenge over the past year, right up to and including this past week. Besides two hospitalizations for depression, I endured multiple treatments for my Achilles, including surgery finally last Monday. A bout of pneumonia knocked me out of commission shortly after my second hospitalization, and back-to-back-to-back painful oral surgeries, including one just four days ago, have been a huge challenge. Does the fact that I'm still standing make me some kind of fighter?

I'm not feeling like a fighter today. I'm facing an unknown, and very expensive future with both my ankle and my mouth. And after battling an intestinal, flu-like illness over the past two days, I'm feeling worn out. I'm trying hard not to, but I'm beginning to feel like the deck is stacked against me. That's a dangerous feeling. It's a feeling which bumps up against self pity.

I don't like self pity. It's useless. It does me no good whatsoever. But I don't necessarily like the label of "fighter" either. It's a lot to live up to. I end up feeling like a weakling when I feel worn down or worried about the future. I question my strength and mental fortitude. That doesn't do me any good either.

It's actually best if I don't reflect too long or too hard on what I've been through. It's best if I keep my focus forward. The book, Alcoholics Anonymous, states, "We shall not regret the past nor wish to shut the door on it," and "No matter how far down the scale we have gone, we will see how our experience can benefit others."

Perhaps that's the purpose of this (extremely long) post. I need to remember where I've been, remember what I've fought through to get here, and use it to quell my worries about the future. Use it as a base of strength, rather than a basis for self pity, and allow my past to carry me forward. And if I can help one person along the way, so much the better. Carry on, my friends.