It was a few nights ago. I was speaking for the local chapter of the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI). As many of you know, I do this occasionally. I tell my story. I retrace my journey with depression to diverse groups of people, from junior high school classes, to church organizations, to mental health providers, and in the process attempt to break down some of the stigma surrounding mental illness. It's almost always a rewarding, uplifting experience. I get as much or more positive vibes from telling my story as others do from hearing it. I enjoy doing it.

Speaking to interested groups almost always makes me feel a belly full of gratitude. This was especially true the other night, as one of the audience members was a retired psychiatric nurse with whom I had many interactions over the years. She commented that it was nice to see me. She was enjoying seeing me there, recovered. What I wanted to tell her was it was just as nice for me to see her. It was great to be seen in recovery mode rather than while in the throes of my illness, which is, of course, when she had seen me in the past. Does that make sense?

And seeing her filled me with gratitude for all of the mental health providers I've seen over the past 13 years. There are so many providers who've made a major impact on me, yet they'll never know. Driving home, I had the urge to stand on a roof top and yell, "Thank You," at the top of my lungs! I wanted to invite those with whom I'd connected to my home to see me, as I am today, living well. I wanted to show them their work with me made a difference. It mattered. And I hadn't forgotten.

It's too bad. Most providers with whom I've connected will never know where I ended up. They have no idea what happens to most of their patients. It's only through chance meetings like the one I just had that we get to show off our healthy selves. And say thanks.

So that's what I did. I said thanks, to those I could, that very night. I sent out some gratitude e-mails. And I plan to say thank you, out loud, to those I can the next time I see them. My doctor, therapist, social worker...they've all heard it before, but I don't think I can thank them enough. I wouldn't be alive today without them.

I also wouldn't be alive today without the nurses at Generose 3W, Mayo Clinic, so this post will have to suffice. Unfortunately, most will never see it. And those nurses are the ones I'd especially like to invite over, to "show off" how well I am today, as a direct result of the care they gave me. Those nurses saw me at my most ill, and they cared for me when I could not care for myself, with respect, compassion, and love. I am lucky to have had access to them and to their inpatient unit.

I am a lucky woman today. I feel well. And I feel grateful for feeling well. I didn't get here by myself. I've had lots of help. It's important for me to remember that. It takes a village. I'm so thankful for all of my fellow villagers.