I ran this morning. It was the first time I'd exercised in 3 days. I went back to bed after my run. It was 10:00 in the morning. Two days ago I fell asleep after work and went to bed at 7:30 PM. Last night I fell asleep after work and went to bed at 8:00 PM. I've been tired. I hate feeling so tired.

Despite having a wonderful weekend away with my friends last weekend, the fatigue I was beginning to feel prior to that weekend escalated over this past week. We had a major snowstorm on Monday, so I wasn't able to get to work. That meant, after shoveling out for two hours, I had to work Tuesday through Saturday. We've been very busy at work, so I had some long days in there, too. The week concluded with a very chaotic, short-staffed, long work day yesterday. It's no wonder I fell asleep shortly after getting home.

Fatigue, as I've noted here before, is one of the long standing, persistent symptoms of my depression. I never seem to be rid of it. Even when my mood is good, the fatigue persists. I'm less fatigued when my mood is good, but it never goes away. For that reason I don't tolerate successive long days of work like I used to prior to depression. And this was a long week.

I hate fatigue. It is a constant reminder of my illness, and it interferes with my life. Missing 2+ days of exercise when I'm battling to get back into shape really hurts. I know, I know. It's not the end of the world. I'm just frustrated. I don't like it when depression symptoms interfere with my goals, especially when I otherwise feel well.

Perhaps, once again, I need to work on acceptance. Accepting that I'm not able to do things like I used to prior to depression, like work 5 successive days without bonking, would probably help me feel less frustrated. Instead I feel like I'm banging my head against a wall. The wall survives, but my head hurts.

I guess fatigue is tough for me to accept. I'm tired of feeling tired. I want to feel "normal." I hope the extra sleep I allowed myself this morning will kick start my energy once again. This week is going to be another busy one at work, and I'd like to handle it better this week than I did last. I'll keep working on that acceptance thing, too.