What a crappy day! How's that for an opening line? No two ways about it, it was wet, sloppy, cold, dark, and windy today. Unfortunately, I was scheduled to run 20 miles--my final 20 miler before tapering for Dallas. I sat in my recliner and finished my first cup of coffee, all dressed up and ready to go, but not willing to challenge the elements. There was a slurry of rain and sleet falling from the sky. The wind occasionally whipped the slurry sideways. And the temperature? It was a balmy 32 degrees. My heart sank. I didn't want to put off my run, but I didn't want to venture out either. It was a conundrum.

Finally, after three hours waiting for the weather to break, I pulled on the Gortex and headed out the door. It was raining fairly hard, and the wind was still blowing. I told myself I'd at least do 10, and if I had to, I could finish the final 10 at the gym. But I hate treadmills. Things started okay, but by mile five I was already huffing and puffing. I walked a bit and kept on going.

By mile 10 I was soaked to the bone and my hands were getting cold. I had purposefully run far from home, and I'd begun to regret that decision. Heading into the wind from miles 11-14 didn't help. I stopped several times to regroup, refill my water, or take another gel. It just wasn't my day, and I'm sure the extra 5 pounds of soaked clothing didn't help. This was a tough run.

I started toward home. Fourteen miles showed on my watch. Only six to go, but I was wet, and my hands were freezing. I had flashes of pep but long stretches of heavy legs and sluggishness. My watch turned over to twenty miles as I stepped into my driveway. Finished. Thank God.

This was a tough, tough run. Maybe it was the weather. Maybe it was just a bad day. I don't know. It was another exercise in perseverance. I'm proud of myself for sticking it out, although it would have been nice if it was just a little easier! Now it's taper time. The Dallas Marathon is three weeks from tomorrow. Despite today, I'm happy with where I'm at. I will be ready come race day. Now, it's time to rest.