     I wanted to take the time to talk about what my goal for “Depression” & Other Bad Words is. What all it will entail. Though my official launch isn’t until July 1st I figured it was a good time to get some content on here.  Give my readers an idea of what I will be doing. This has been a project slowly in the works for some time now. It is more than just a blog. In fact the goal eventually is a book.
     I have been slowly working on the book for a few months now. As previously mentioned it is inspired by my own real life struggles with depression and self-harm. It started as a process to help as I worked through some things. Then as a way to help with my writers block. Eventually it turned in to a passion project. I am writing about my own experience living and coping with depression, working to overcome self-harm, and recovering from a suicide attempt. As well as trying to bring to light some general information, talk about the social aspects, and religious views on self-harm and suicide. I want to create ideas for dialogue between family and friends. I hope it will help others not feel so alone, understand better what their loved ones are feeling, and spread a positive message that depression is real but also not something to be ashamed of.
     As I work on the book I have had several people recommend I start a blog. After thinking it over I figured, "why not?". It will be helpful for getting my thoughts in order and organizing topics. It also gives me a chance to write about some topics I may not plan to cover in book. In addition it is a way I can do current reviews on depression, self-harm, and suicide in the media and in pop culture. So I am actually very excited now to be starting the blog in addition to working on the book. I will be posting on Tuesdays and Thursdays. I will post bits from what I am writing for the book, personal stories, interviews with others, and reviews. Another thing to look forward to on my blog will be posts containing my photography and art related to the topics. So be sure to check out my bi-weekly posts!
     A smaller side project of mine involves sticky notes and positive messages. Like this-


     Now I know I am not the first nor will I be the last to leave uplifting sticky notes for strangers to find. In fact it was a note on a bathroom mirror in college saying “You are beautiful” one stressful day that gave me the idea. It was a nice little confidence boost. A simple kind word from a stranger that brightened the day. Who doesn’t need that from time to time? Especially if you are quietly struggling with depression.  I have made quite a few, and stick them at random when I feel like it could improve someone’s day. I am constantly trying to think up new messages to leave. Using an array of colorful sticky I keep in my purse at all times now. I even print them now, so they are nice and legible. I have two sets currently, positive notes and scripture ‘sticky’s. I know not all people struggling have a faith, which is why I have lots of different notes. But for those of us that do those scriptures can be equally uplifting as a simple positive one. Anyways this project is a simple one, to try to spread positivity, hope, and kindness in a very simple manner.
     On that ‘sticky’ note (sorry bad joke), I will be Instagraming notes in various places. In fact I have several social media outlets I will be posting to. With things like links to the blog, updates on book progress, positive messages, shared pictures or videos relating to depression, and more.

Facebook:
www.facebook.com/depressionobw

Twitter:
www.twitter.com/depressionobw

Instagram:
www.instagram.com/depressionobw

     I also have a hashtag, #depressionobw , which I hope people who find the stickys will use if they post about them. I will use it when posting, but others can as well when sharing the blog or anything else related.
     There you go! This gives you an idea about what I will be working on. The kind of content I will be posting. As well as other places on the web that you can find me. I do ask that comments left through any of the social media outlets be relevant and try to keep them as positive as possible. I am aware that can be difficult when talking about such ‘depressing’ topics. Remember the whole goal of “Depression” & Other Bad Words is to encourage those who struggle and inform those who do not.
     I am both overjoyed and terrified to be sharing this process with you all!

~Samantha Lou