AA is often referred to as a "program of action." In fact, I just finished a post about this topic over at The Second Road. Recovery from alcoholism definitely requires action. Putting down the drink wasn't enough for me, I needed to recover physically, emotionally and spiritually. I needed to learn a new way to live. In this way, I think recovery from alcoholism and recovery from mental illness are very similar. My recovery from mental illness also requires ongoing action.

Without taking action to heal, I cannot hope to recover physically, emotionally or spiritually from devastating depression. Sitting around waiting for health to happen is unrealistic, yet don't some of us expect that? I did. After all, my illness came on without warning or explanation, why shouldn't I expect it to go away similarly? I'm sure that's what I thought during the early years of my illness. I didn't take action.

I was so wrapped up in the unfairness of my lot, I couldn't move forward. I felt like shit. I had no energy. I lost my spouse, my job, my house--all because of this illness. I wanted to die, and all I could do was focus on wanting to die. The more I focused on my pain, the more painful my life got.

This constant misery focus is a trap which I think may be unique to mental illness. We, of the non-Hallmark illnesses, must face constant stigma, shame and discrimination not encountered by those with hotdish-friendly diseases. (Huh, you say? When your depression symptoms were most debilitating, did the church ladies bring you a casserole and jello? I didn't think so.) Our experience, our suffering is not only misunderstood by friends and relatives, it is downright invalidated. Hence, we repeat and reiterate how badly we feel, how much life hurts, in hopes that someone will get it. Worse yet, I internalized the invalidation--sometimes still do. I think my misery focus may, at times, have been an attempt to convince myself that, yes, I really was sick.

At some point, perhaps as a result of DBT training, I realized focusing on my pain wasn't going to help me heal. Perhaps it happened when I stopped caring who believed and who didn't, although that's still only the case on my best days. Or maybe it was because I had finally surrounded myself with a stable, supportive, and caring treatment team who validated my experience. Validation (and hotdish) is something people with cancer, MS, or heart disease get almost immediately, whereas it took me 4 years to get a nonjudgmental, professional team in place. Their validation and support freed me to focus on recovery and healing. (I still haven't received a hotdish, though.)

By removing the need to convince them of my pain, my treatment team allowed me to focus on therapeutic action instead. Perhaps if we know the people around us believe we are "really sick," getting well is not so daunting. I mean, if we are stuck in the trap of proving our misery, aren't we less likely to take actions which may lessen our misery? Are we scared that if we improve before anyone believes we were sick, we might hear, "I told you so," from the non-supportive, non-believers? I don't know. It's just a spontaneous thought I had, and I realize it may be a prickly thought for some readers.

I assure you, though, I am NOT saying that we don't get well on purpose! NOT AT ALL! For ME, just ME, it makes sense that I began taking more positive action once I had the support and validation of the people around me. And recovery requires action.

Without action I cannot maintain my health today. My depression is not gone, but it is certainly more stable than in years past. However, if I stop taking the actions--if I stop taking my meds, getting exercise and sleep, eating well, and finding meaning in every day--if I stop doing those therapeutic things, I am sure my tenuous grasp on stability will fall quickly away. Recovery, for me, requires action.