I'm sitting here with my foot in a bucket of ice trying to abate the tendinitis in my right achilles tendon. But tendinitis is not what's on my mind tonight. I'm thinking about money, damn money. If there's one thing that gets me going, it's financial stress. And right now, if there's one thing I've got, it's financial stress. Dammit! I hate financial stress!

Financial stress almost always makes me resentful of my illness. Resentment is not a sentiment I can afford, as it, too, will drag me down. Anyway, I'm resentful of this damn illness, because my financial stress is a direct result of depression. Before I got sick, I worked full-time. Since the onset of depression, I've either not worked or worked part-time. Part-time is nice. It keeps me emotionally stable, but it sucks when it comes to paying the bills. And every once in awhile, for various unforeseen reasons, it really, really sucks! That's where I'm at right now.

I opened my checking account last night and found that, as scheduled, all my bills had been paid. Unfortunately, I also discovered my account balance was zero! I have another 7 days before my next paycheck comes. How did this happen? Well, as I mentioned, various unforeseen circumstances. I live on a razor thin line between solvency and insolvency. It doesn't take much to upset the apple cart.

I don't want to go into all of my woes, but my apple cart has definitely been upset. This kind of stuff really bothers me. I pride myself on being very good with my money. I don't buy anything I don't need. I'm never late paying bills, and I don't even use credit cards! No matter what, I take care of my responsibilities. Seeing a zero account balance, especially when I've got a week before another paycheck, is not sitting well.

I do have a small savings account, which I hate to touch, but I guess this is one of the reasons I have it. Of course, then I worry about replacing the savings account money! Ugh! Like I said, financial stress really gets me going. I hate it. I hate it. I hate it.