I had a productive yet relaxing weekend. I'm feeling pretty satisfied. Things are going really well right now. And I'm not even waiting for the other shoe to drop.

The oppressive heat and humidity we'd been having for 4 or 5 days finally broke on Saturday. I got up early to go running but soon decided to catch a another hour of sleep when I realized it was actually nearly cool outside. After a great morning meeting, I had a decent 16-mile midday run. It was a good run, a nice run, until about mile 12. Things slid downhill from there. I simply ran out of gas. I needed several water breaks over the final four miles, but eventually I got them done.

Unfortunately, I was a bit wasted, physically, for many hours after my run. Perhaps I got a little dehydrated running in the middle of the day. Even though it wasn't hot, the sun was shining. Being an early morning runner, I guess I'm not used to that. I did recover, however, and ended my evening with an AA speaker meeting which was filled with fellowhip, spirituality, and hope. That was a nice way to end the day.

This morning I got up early to run with a friend. I was tired and a little worried about coming back so soon after my tough run yesterday afternoon, but I wanted to give it a shot. My friend went back to bed, but I didn't know that until I had already gotten dressed, so I went out alone anyway. And I'm so glad I did. It was a glorious morning, and I had a great 8-mile run. I even managed the four middle miles at marathon pace. I was happily fatigued when done. I love that feeling.

I spent the rest of today working on my recovery with my sponsor, listening to a couple of friends who each needed an ear, doing a little laundry and cleaning my house. I hate cleaning, but I always feel so good sitting in a clean house once I'm done. I probably should do it more often.

So it's been a good weekend. I overcame. I helped. I celebrated. I accomplished. I'm grateful for my blessings today. I'm grateful for the people in my life. I'm grateful for my doctor and my friends. I'm grateful for sobriety and what seems to be a depression remission. Feeling satisfied is a nice way to head off to bed. Good night.