I've been feeling a bit restless, irritable and discontent lately. No particular reason. Just me being me. Me focusing too much on me, as my sponsor so nicely observed. Thanks, K. So on my run today, I practiced something I learned long ago but don't do often enough. In DBT it's referred to as mindfulness. It's a meditative technique which, when I practice it, helps me focus on something other than my own restlessness. Like I said, today I did it on my run.

Running meditation is probably the only way I'll ever succeed at meditating. Meditation doesn't sit well with me, because I rarely have the patience to sit and practice it. Sitting quietly in an attempt to meditate makes me more anxious! I've long since given up trying, even though it's supposed to be an integral part of my recovery program. Maybe someday I'll grow into it...

While running a hard workout today, however, I realized I was actually practicing a form of meditation--mindfulness. My training schedule called for a speed workout. Specifically, I was to run 10 reps of 1:30 hard followed by 1 minute recovery within my 7 mile run. One minute and thirty seconds of hard running doesn’t seem like a lot on paper, but you’d be amazed how long 1:30 lasts when you’re running hard, especially on reps 8, 9, and ten. To keep my mind off my increasingly heavy legs, burning lungs, and racing heart rate, I counted my steps.

Yup. Simple as that. I counted my steps. But again, it only sounds simple. With distracting traffic, pedestrians, the urge to look continually at my watch, my fast pace (i.e. counting very fast), AND heavy legs, burning lungs, and racing heart; counting from 1-300 got a bit more complicated. (Was I on 49 or 59?)

I found I really had to focus on the numbers, at times even visualizing them, or I quickly lost track of where I was. A few times, I found myself stuck on the same number repeatedly or jumping from 49 to 60 instead of 50. It was challenging. It was mindful. It kept me from focusing on my effort (read: pain!) and helped me through a tough run. It helped me get out of myself, and I felt very satisfied once done.

Maybe I’m not as hopeless as I thought. Maybe meditation isn’t such a far flung idea for me. Maybe meditation can be something other than sitting on a pillow chanting, “Ooohhhmmmm…” Maybe.