As I sit here, my new puppy, Jet, is racing around in circles, attacking his toys and batting his balls around the room. He is adorable, as he squeaks his toys and bounces the balls off the walls! He is very good at rambunctiously humoring himself. Sometimes he plays for 5-10 minutes non-stop. I actually videotaped him the other night. If I can figure it out, I'll post it here.

As you might expect, I've been very busy since picking up Jet last Saturday. I'm not getting anything done around my house! I'm potty training Jet, and he's doing very well, but it means he has to be under my watchful eye at all times. It's a bit exhausting. 

Unfortunately, I've come down with a nasty respiratory illness over the past couple days, which only makes things more difficult. Today, all I wanted to do was come home and sleep after work. My muscles were aching. My chest was full. My head was stuffy. But Jet had been in his kennel all day, and I needed to tire him out before I could put him back in the kennel in order to nap. I did, and we both got a nap in later.

I've had a little bit of difficulty readjusting to life since getting back from Mexico. Not only am I missing naps and getting little done around my house, my mood has taken a hit. I'm having an awful time motivating myself to do anything. Exercise, cooking, cleaning, and socializing have all taken a back seat, and it's not all Jet's fault. I've made it to work, but it's been tough to put my full energy into it. I'm having trouble caring, not about my patients, but about doing anything worthwhile or healthy.

That being said, I am hanging in there. Jet is forcing me to do that. If he wasn't in the house right now, I'd likely be sleeping a whole lot more! My mood is lower than I'd like. My motivation is nil. But I'm hanging in there. I know this is temporary. It feels like a bump in the road. It's not gotten too big yet. I'm trying to ride it out and keep my worries to a minimum. That's about all I can motivate to do for now.