Remember that cold I had last week? Well, it took a vicious turn for the worse on Sunday, and yesterday I was officially diagnosed with pneumonia. I've had pneumonia before, so by Monday, when I could barely walk from one end of my house to the other, I figured I had it again. I've been in bed for most of the past three days. Thank God there are lots of football games on right now! At least I have something to look at when I'm not asleep!

Being this ill is difficult. I can take care of myself for the most part, but taking care of Puck is more difficult. Poor Puck. Until last night, he'd been inside for days. More than once he stood by my bed and stared at me, as if to say, "Why are you in bed again?" Even when up, I didn't have the energy to play with him. So I had to ask for help yesterday--something I don't care to do! My friend Shelli came over and walked him for me. He was so excited! After just 30 minutes outside with her, he was content the rest of the evening. I felt better, too.

Being this ill is also tough on my mental health. Being inside alone is tough. Even though I tend toward the isolative, I typically do get out. Right now I'm staring at several more days of isolation. I'm hoping to get out to an AA meeting by Saturday. And if the antibiotics work, I should have enough energy to go back to work next week.

Unfortunately, I don't know when I'll feel up to exercising again. With every passing moment, I feel my fitness going down the tubes. All of my hard work over the past 6 months will soon disappear. I'll have to start over at zero. That really sucks. I'll have to fight the "fuck-its" to get back out there as soon as I can. Otherwise this period of inactivity will last well beyond my illness. That would only compound my frustration and make starting over even more difficult, so please root for me to get going as soon as possible!

Well, that's all I've got for now. It's time to get back in bed. Typing is surprisingly exhausting! Have a great day, everyone!