Things are tough with my psyche. I've been back to the local beach to swim in open water twice since I last wrote. Things were not much better than they were originally. On Thursday night, I swam back and forth in the shallow water with a few forays over my head. I still felt panicky once the water got deep. I still couldn't swim more than about 100 yards without stopping to stand up. If I got tired, and I was over my head, my body physically freaked. I think this is bordering on a phobia, and I don't consider myself a phobic-type person at all! Needless to say, I left feeling very disappointed and frustrated (and near tears) again.

Yesterday began with a very difficult race. It was a 10 mile trail run. I'd never run that particular race before, and I'm pretty sure I won't do it again. Wow, it was tough. I was having one of those off days when running is difficult. Being off combined with hills, hills, and more hills was not a good combination. I wanted to walk off the course at 5 miles, but I had no idea where I was so I couldn't! By six miles I was walking up most of the hills. By seven I was walking up all of them and then some. I've only collapsed to the ground once in my life after finishing a race. Yesterday changed that to twice.

Perhaps I shouldn't have run the race, as the triathlon (if I do it) is only two weeks away. But I thought a good race would help take my mind off my swimming distress. Unfortunately, it wasn't a good race.

Today, I returned to the lake with my brand new wetsuit. It didn't help. I still had trouble swimming. I brought my friends Bill and Cindy along to watch. Cindy was helpful with some technique tips, and just having her there helped me relax a tiny bit. But it seems it's no use. I couldn't make it around approximately 200 yards of buoys. (The swim for my triathlon is close to 1600 yards!) I made multiple attempts, and I made it about 3/4 of the way around once; but that's not going to cut it even in a shorter triathlon. Worse, each effort ended with me swimming, panicky, back to shore. Cindy was patient and helpful, but in the end I was again frustrated and tearful.

This feels like a huge challenge to me. Part of me wants to go back out right now and work to conquer this. But a large part of me is screaming, "It's time to quit!" I don't know. Is this worth all the angst it's causing? My mood has dipped. I'm having trouble focusing at work. My house is a mess. Swimming trouble has got me overwhelmed, and it's wreaking havoc in other areas of my life. I don't like that, but I don't like NOT being able to do something either--especially when I know I should be able to do it! So I'm not sure it's worth it, but I don't think I'm ready to give up yet. I've got two weeks before the triathlon. I'm not exactly hopeful, but I'm willing to keep trying.