Perceived--
adjective
1. detected by instinct or inference rather than by recognized perceptual cues; "the felt presence of an intruder"; "a sensed presence in the room raised goosebumps on her arms"; "a perceived threat" [syn: sensed]
2. detected by means of the senses; "a perceived difference in temperature"

Slight--
verb (used with object)
1. to treat as of little importance.
2. to treat (someone) with indifference; ignore, esp. pointedly or contemptuously; snub: to be slighted by society.
noun
3. an act or instance of slighting indifference or treatment: Slights marred his work.
4. a pointed and contemptuous discourtesy; affront: She considered not being invited an unforgivable slight.

------------------------------------

Alcoholics suffer from problems of perception. People with mental illness and personality disorders suffer from problems of perception. Since I used to fit into all of the above categories, you might guess that I've had a history of suffering from perceptual inaccuracies and blatant mistakes.

Historically, when I based my feelings, judgments or opinions on my perceptions, it was akin to walking through a field of land-mines. My past perceptions usually tripped me up and exploded in my face, resulting in serious injury to myself and others. Fortunately, I learned from these painful, bloody experiences, which is why I need your help today.

I perceive a slight from a person within an organization I care deeply about. This person is newer to the organization than I am. She is the part-time, paid coordinator who assigns volunteer speakers for community mental health education and awareness. I have been voluntarily speaking and training new public speakers for this organization for years. Prior to this person coming on board, I was one of the most frequent speakers, speaking several times per month to schools, churches, civic groups, live radio programs, and even the television news. I cherish the role, as I am passionate about educating the public about depression and mental illness.

After being stigmatized, fired, and losing everything because of my depression, I made the decision to use my experiences to enlighten others. I figured if even one person changed their perspective, developed a better understanding of a sick relative, or decided to seek help as a result of something I said, anything I had gone through would pale in comparison. Speaking gives some meaning to this otherwise meaningless illness. It's the same reason I write this blog. I enjoy it. I value the opportunity to squash the stigma and to hopefully effect change. It gives me a sense of purpose.

The opportunity to speak, however, seems to have been taken away. Over the past year, I've gone from speaking, or being asked to speak, several times per month to once or twice this entire year. I learned, after the fact, from one teacher that she had requested me for three speaking dates, but I was only offered the choice of one of the three dates. That was a couple months ago. I let it go. But since then, I have paid more attention to the number of opportunities I've been offered.

I assumed I wasn't being called because the organization wasn't getting as many speaking requests. I also knew that we'd made a big push to add speakers to our speaker's bureau, so perhaps that was the reason for fewer calls. For awhile, I was one of only a very few volunteers, but now we have several trained speakers. Unfortunately, today it became clear that I've been overly optimistic, stupid or naive. The organization has had many speaking requests, and other speakers have been called and scheduled multiple times. I've just not been called. That is my perception.

This sucks! I'm angry. I'm resentful. I'm confused. I perceive a slight. I've heard gossip from other volunteers about this person which, if true, would explain her actions. I don't like gossip, and while it's nice to have senior members of the organization reassure me, it doesn't help me fulfill my desire to educate people. I'm being kept from doing something I love. I'm being kept from assisting an organization I value. I'm being left outside the loop of an organization in which I've invested a lot of time and energy. And why? Not because of anything I've done according to those who've tried to reassure me. Just because.

And this is where I need help. I can act on my perception, which may or may not be true, and go after this person with both barrels. That's what I would have done in the past--not very effective. Part of me wants to say, "Fuck it! Fuck them!" I want to leave them in anger without saying a thing. Of course, that also solves nothing. In fact, my situation would be worse. I'd be a non-speaker full of resentment! That sounds like a prescription for mental health disaster. Not a great option...

Speaking to this person would be a better option. I need to say something, but I don't want to say anything! I don't want to deal with this BS! One of the benefits of volunteering, versus a paid position, is staying out of the office BS! That's how it's supposed to work, anyway. I resent having to deal with this crap! I'm pissed I have to deal with another person's (perceived) character flaws! Lord knows, I've got enough of my own to deal with! I didn't do anything to this person, but I'm apparently not on her Christmas list. That's her shit! Why should I have to deal with it? But I do...if I want to speak publicly again, I must deal with it.

There's another shitty thing about being forced to deal with this. Just because I deal with it maturely (hopefully) doesn't mean I'll get the outcome I desire. I can control my response to the perceived slight, but I can't control how my response will be received. This fact makes it even more difficult for me to approach this person. I don't want to expose myself, make myself vulnerable to this person, and then have nothing change. I guess this is the risk I have to take if I want any chance to continue speaking.

This sucks. I don't like it. I feel resentful. And I feel cornered--forced to act, despite the fact I didn't participate in creating the situation.
What would you do?

What would you do?