I've been feeling a little conflicted about my blog lately. I began this blog in the throes of depression, feeling like I needed to help others who were struggling like me. I wasn't working, as I had been disabled by my illness for several years. I knew nothing about blogging. I learned as I went along. I was early in recovery, and knew very little about living a sober life. I had time to write, the creativity of someone in pain, and lots to say.

In those early days, I wrote and wrote and wrote. I had little support. Those around me thought it strange writing a blog about feeling bad and running. Whoever heard of such a thing? What did I hope to accomplish? Nevertheless, I poured out descriptive posts and even a few poems. My goal was to educate, support, and share. But no one knew I was there, and I was happy when I got ten readers in a month. It didn't matter. The writing made me feel better.

Now, it turns out, I've got readers, and followers, and recognition among my peers. Based on comments I've received, it seems the writing makes you feel better, too. But I'm feeling conflicted. As I gathered readers, and comments, and recognition, something in me began to shift. I had fewer and fewer days in the black hole of which I once so passionately wrote. I got better.

Over the course of this blog, you've seen me go from disabled to work. There was a time not that long ago when I didn't think I'd ever work in my chosen field again. You've read along as I've taken this illness from my bed to competitive racing in the streets. The illness which didn't allow me out of my bed now allows me energy to train for a triathlon. I think largely because of my connection with all of you, I've been healing.

Unfortunately, healing leaves me conflicted. I have less time and creativity now. Posts which used to flow like water rushing down the mountain side now thunk like cold peanut butter on soft bread. I find less to be proud of in my words. Creativity has given way to utility. Whereas I used to write nearly every day, I now find time, hopefully, only 2-3 times per week. This blog which used to be about mental illness, with a little running on the side, now seems to be more about running (and swimming, and biking) with a little mental illness on the side. I began this blog to educate others about depression. Am I still accomplishing that goal?

Am I still accomplishing what I set out to do? Am I still a voice for those with mental illness? Do they find solace or comfort or support in my posts? I don't know. But if they don't, if I'm no longer a voice for those with whom I hope to connect, is it time to say I'm done? I don't know.

It's weird. I feel a little guilty for feeling better. I feel a little bad about not feeling so bad. Can a person in "remission" still connect with those who aren't? I hope that my feeling better offers some hope, but I don't know if it does. Does it?