I apologize for the delay in posting this week. The road has been rough. I've been overwhelmed with feelings of hopelessness, saddled with dark, disturbing thoughts, handicapped by the energy of a sloth, and stupefied with delayed mentation. I've been evaluated and reevaluated on a daily basis by multiple professionals, all of whom expressed concern over the level of my despair. Things have been almost unbelievably difficult, yet here I am. Life goes on.

At the request of a couple professionals, my mother flew in to stay with me after I was released from the hospital last week. She is here to help out and to keep me safe. She is assisting me with reintegrating into life, as my brain is severely disabled in the aftermath of ECT treatments, and possibly simply as a complication of the depression. I literally could not be more stupid! I cannot remember anything!

I feel like I've been dropped into my world without the benefit of any historical perspective. I cannot remember when or how many times I've been hospitalized over the past 4 weeks (3 times). I could not remember the fact that Jet had surgery on his elbow approximately two months ago. I can't remember race results which have previously been second nature. Heck, I can't even remember running most of the races I ran this past summer! I'm clueless, and it sucks! I have to ask my mom or my friends for every detail of my recent past, and even after they inform me, the details often remain totally unfamiliar. It is frustrating, unsettling, and bewildering. I hate it.

I do not wish this level of depression on anyone. Someone asked me the other day if I wanted to die. I've determined that I don't care anymore, but I won't take my life, as I care enough about the others around me that I would not want to bring them such hurt. My thinking, however, pulls me in that direction. I am using what little energy I have to keep putting one foot in front of the other and move in the direction of life instead.

I appreciate your time here, dear readers. I appreciate your thoughts and prayers. Your recent comments are so appreciated. I am humbled by your words. Thank you all so much. You all help me more than you can or will ever know. Thank you. I only hope I am able to impart a tiny bit of wisdom somewhere within this pain. At least then there might be some purpose. I can only hope. Until next time, my friends, I'll keep on keeping on as best I can. Thanks for hanging in there with me.