I believe it is Rachel Naomi Remen, the author of Kitchen Table Wisdom, who says, "A story is a container for meaning." We all have our own stories which define us and influence how we view the world. For example, each of us with depression, though we are struggling with the same illness, has a different story.

In my experience, depression seems to break down into three primary stories. For some, depression seems to define them. Everything they do and see is colored by it. All input and output filters through its cloud of despair. It is who they are. For some others, depression appears to be an obstacle. It gets in the way, but they constantly strive to push it into the background. It's a frustrating piece of their experience. And for a few more, depression seems to be an afterthought. It's already in the background. They may even forget about it, until it temporarily flares up. Their friends may not know they have it, and whether friends know or not is not important to them. It is separate from their person and their experience. Same illness, three different stories.

My yoga instructor also talks about our stories. She preaches letting them go. She discourages letting our stories define us. For example, I have a story about my hip. It goes something like this. ...I've had two hip surgeries, and as a result, I have continued weakness and limited motion in my right hip. It's affected my running. I seem to be more easily injured because of it...blah, blah, blah. Prior to beginning my yoga class, I was certain I wouldn't be able to perform certain poses because of my 'bad' hip. I let that story define my limitations before I even tried the poses! I was ready and willing to share when I couldn't do a pose perfectly! My yoga teacher foiled that willingness when she preached letting go and "just trying it."

Perfection isn't required in my yoga class. Trying is. Trying, letting go of my stories and trying, is all our instructor asks. As a result, I can do poses I never imagined I could do, and my hip is stronger and more flexible because of it. By busting out of my story, by trying, I grew.

Imagine my continued growth if I just try in life, too? How often do I let my stories define my limits before I even try? How often do you? How many of you want to go back to school, for example, but your story won't allow it? How about getting a new job, or, as in my case, going back to work? Do you have a story about your illness, your finances, or your circumstances which keeps you constrained? I know I do. What if we just said yes to everything instead? Imagine. Imagine the possibilities!