I'm getting tired of pleading for help and support. That may seem like a strange thing to say, and maybe it is, but I'm tired of begging for help and support. I'm tired of needing other people in order to perform basic daily functions. I'm tired of being sick. I'm tired of having sick thoughts, lower than low moods, and a crippling lack of energy. I want to function again. I want to regain my energy, motivation and independence. I don't want to be ill any longer.

I'm so tired of being the sick one among my friends and colleagues. I worry I will wear others down. In no time at all I could be alone in the crowd. And who could blame any of them? I'm wiped out from living in this body and struggling with my brain. It's got to be exhausting for those around me, those forced to deal with my sick brain. My distorted thoughts, my inability to take meaningful action, my confusion and memory loss, my lethargy and fatigue; at some point, even my closest friends have got to throw in the towel. And I won't blame them. I'm expecting it. It's just a matter of when.

I'm tired of being the sick one; the one who can't work and risks losing her beloved job, the one who can't decipher her finances or settle her debts without motherly oversight, the one losing fitness and adding pounds as a result of lethargy and indifference, the one whose life has gradually become unrecognizable and difficult to navigate with any sort of grace. I'm tired of being the sick one.

And I'm tired of complaining, which is all I've done with this post, so it's time to end it now. I pray for relief. I pray for friends and colleagues with incredible stamina. I pray for the tolerance to accept and deal with whatever comes my way, to no longer identify as the sick one. And I pray for the strength and resilience to conquer this illness, to crush it, to free myself from that which binds, and to come through unfettered and healthier on the other side. Thank you for praying with me. Someday, the sick one I will no longer be.