     Did you know there is more to depression than just the emotional/mental side? Seriously! It doesn’t just affect mood even though it is a mood disorder. There is a very real, not so pleasant, physical side to depression. How it manifests physically can vary quite a bit.  There are some more common physical symptoms as well as some not so common. Affecting everyone differently. Here I will give some examples and talk about some of the ways depression has physically affected me personally.
    Exhaustion, Fatigue, and Sleep
  Some of the most common physical symptoms include things like exhaustion and fatigue.  Believe it or not dealing with a great amount of emotional distress does physically exhaust our bodies just as it our minds. It can leave you feeling you’ve just run a marathon or feeling like you have taken a tumble down a hill. And getting as physically and mentally worn out as you may be you just can’t get a good night’s rest. Instead you lay awake all night with your mind racing, unable to quiet it enough to sleep. This my dear readers is Insomnia. Something I struggle with far more often than I would like.
     It is so frustrating to not be able to sleep when you fell so tired all of the time. Sitting up all night thinking about how badly you need some rest before tackling another day. I do not function well without sleep, in fact I usually need between 8-12 solid hours or risk a nasty migraine the next day. I have had to learn the do’s and don’ts of dealing with insomnia and my restless mind. Don’ts include, turning on the TV, getting on FB, playing on my phone, or pretty much anything with a lighted screen. Do’s include putting on some lavender oil, laying down a bit early since I know it can take forever to fall asleep, and putting on some soft music. I frequently will turn on a special playlist I have spent the last few years tweaking for myself. It runs about an hour and a half, playing a few soft Celtic instrumental tracks, “May It Be” from Lord of the Rings, and a sleep meditation. I am usually asleep by the end of it. Unfortunately on really rough days I can do all the right things and still not get any sleep at all.
     On the flipside depression can also greatly increase how much you sleep. With the constant feeling of exhaustion it is easy to want to crawl back in to bed as soon as you get up. Too much sleep is just as bad as not enough. It leaves you feeling groggy and gross. It is possible to deal with bouts of insomnia as well as sleeping too much. I deal with both, I will have a month were I just can’t sleep, then the next all I want to do is sleep all day, even after sleeping all night. Sometimes I will end up on a nocturnal sleep schedule, because I can’t sleep at night, so I will sleep all day. This erratic sleep schedule is no go when it comes to work or social schedules though.  

Metabolism and Appetite
     Another common way depression can affect the body is what it can do to your metabolism. The loss of appetite can lead to drastic weight loss. The need to eat your feelings can lead to rapid weight gain.  A mix of both is no better. It is not uncommon for this to lead to digestion problems such as constipation or diarrhea.  As well as lead to other health issues such as diabetes and heart disease.
     I have days where I don’t feel hungry at all, so I wouldn’t eat. This leads my body to store fat since it thinks I am starving it. Then the next day I may eat everything in sight. There was a period of time when my depression was at its worse that went from 170 to 255 in rather rapidly. Leaving myself with stretch marks and becoming pre-diabetic. Thankfully as I am managing everything better I have managed to lose 43lbs in the last 6 months and am no longer considered pre-diabetic.

Others
     Some of the physical symptoms can appear right on the surface of your skin. Some people get splotchy or develop red patches when they are in emotional distress. Others may deal with acne well past their teen years. Have you ever heard of stress pimples? They are real. I get itchy when I feel a great deal of anxiety with my depression. This will cause me to scratch, something I have to watch closely.
Some other physical symptoms may include:
-Muscle aches
-Chest pain
-Blood pressure & heart rate
-Headaches/Migraines
-Light headedness
- and even fainting

Depression Hurts
     So why does depression have somatic symptoms if it is considered a mood disorder? It is believe to be due to a link between the pain and depression sharing a neurological pathway. Resulting in physical pain due to chemical reactions. Not everyone that suffers from depression suffers from physical symptoms, some suffer from a few, and some suffer from more of the physical symptoms than the mental. It really does depend on the individual, their biological differences, brain chemistry, and even hormones.
     Those that are pre-disposed to migraines (like myself with my migraine disorder) are more likely to have those migraines worsened by depression. Same goes for many other pre-disposed physical ailments. Unfortunately the rate of suicidal thoughts is elevated in patients also dealing with the chronic pain from the physical symptoms of depression.
     So next time you think it is all in your head remember than depression can manifest very real physical symptoms. Be sure you talk to your doctor about them!

Today's educational information comes from The Mayo Clinic, Mental Help, and fantastic Journal titled “The Link Between Depression andPhysical Symptoms” by Madhukar H. Trivedi, M.D.


~Samantha Lou