Every day can't be a great day. That's what the song said. I turned up the radio, laughed ironically, and continued my afternoon drive home. Today was certainly not a great day. It was an overwhelming and stressful day, but it was definitely not a great day.

Actually, it's been a tough 36 hours. It started with the big truck repair yesterday--a repair so big it lasted until this afternoon. Then last night, my furnace shut off again. I had no heat despite paying $350 for a repair just five days ago! That made today, a day when I got a new patient, quite rushed, as I needed to make time to pick up my truck and to wait at home for the furnace repairman. Starting a patient can take up to 5 hours. All of a sudden I felt like I needed to be in three places at once.

So I rushed. I rushed as professionally as possible through my patients. I left my paperwork undone until I got home, and I did it while I waited for the repairman. I freaked out when the repairman informed me I likely needed another $350 part in order to fix the furnace. I don't have $350 extra dollars, so I told him I'd wait to see what happened. Perhaps, miraculously, it won't break down again. (Is that another ironic laugh I hear?)

After the repairman left I rushed off to the mechanic--a 30 minute drive each way--in order to pick up my truck before they closed. That's where I received my first bit of good news. I didn't need new brakes after all. So instead of a $700 repair, I only had to spend $500! (Insert another ironic laugh here.) Spending all of this money, money I don't feel I have to spend, makes me very anxious.

Tomorrow is my root canal repair surgery. I'm anxious about that, too. I have tomorrow's visit paid for, but I'm worried I may need more than one visit. I have an infection in the root of the tooth, and if the infection is too severe, the endodontist won't be able to repair it in one visit. More pain, more time, more money...

Today was one of those days. It didn't begin favorably, and it didn't improve much throughout the day. To make matters worse, I've been eating crap for three days. I think I crave crap when I'm stressed. COOKIES!! Eating cookies, and cake, and ice cream does nothing to improve my anxiety state. It only makes things worse mentally and physically. And making myself feel worse is really the last thing I need!

So I've got to turn this thing around. It's getting harder and harder for me to believe it will all work out, but I have to get back my faith. It will all work out. I may not like it. (I don't.) It may not be easy. (It isn't.) But eventually it will all work out. I have to believe that. I have to believe that, or life will only get more difficult. Right now, life's overwhelming and stressful, and I don't like it very much. But hey, every day can't be a great day. And tomorrow's got to be better.