Yesterday, at work, we had an inservice by a local company. An incredibly buff, quite handsome man was one of the presenters. My co-workers all noticed he wasn't wearing a ring, and they made sure I knew it. I guess I don't look for things like that, although I probably should. Apparently, they're all trying to get me a date. I appreciated their efforts. He was quite handsome.

Before I knew it, he left our office, but I couldn't get him out of my head. I was disappointed I didn't find more reason to talk to him. I had no idea if there was any potential there or not. He had given me his card, but it only contained his office number. And I didn't think to give him my card. No wonder I'm still single, huh? What to do, what to do...

I was on my way to my first patient--still thinking about the mystery man--when I decided to take a chance. I decided to ask him out for coffee. It took a few more minutes to work up the courage, but I finally called him. Unfortunately, he was out of the office. I left a message with a co-worker asking only that he call me back. He did, today. After exchanging brief pleasantries, I asked if he'd like to go out for coffee sometime. I think I surprised him, because he seemed to catch his breath, but then he said, "Absolutely!" And so I have a date with David.

I'm not sure what propelled me to take this chance, but I think it might have had to do with a Mark Twain quote I heard recently. "Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things that you didn't do than by the ones you did do..." I really identified with this quote when I first heard it. I knew I would regret it if I didn't take the chance to get to know this guy. I went through all the possible scenarios, and the worst result I could envision was David laughing at my suggestion. Well, that certainly wouldn't have killed me, so I went for it. I called. And now I have a date with David.

I'm so glad I called. Who knows what will happen. There is an age difference, he's younger, and that may or may not be an issue. We may have nothing in common. We may have everything in common. We may have similar or very different life goals. At this point, it's all unknown. But whatever happens, I'm so glad I took the opportunity to explore whatever this turns out to be. I'm not sure what came over me, but I'm pretty happy it did!

ADDENDUM: We had our date. It went great, but the age difference ended up being too great for both of us. (Apparently I look younger than I am, and he looks older than he is!) Too bad. We decided to be friends. I can never have too many friends. Still glad I took the risk.