If you are a regular reader, you're probably a little surprised. I typically don't lead off with a downer like "sometimes life isn't fair," but I had to go with it today. Actually, I planned to go with it yesterday, but I couldn't muster the energy to revisit the situation. And without further ado, here is the situation. Yesterday, I basically lost my job.

Yesterday, I got a phone call from my boss. She informed me that all patients from this moment forward would be assigned to my co-worker, the full-time physical therapist. I didn't do anything wrong. My boss says she doesn't want to lose me. She'd like me to stay with the company, but until we get our patient census up, the full-timer will be getting all of the patients. For me, no patients means no hours which means no money. So I didn't get fired or laid off, but I won't be getting any patients to work with until my full-time co-worker raises her productivity to that which is expected of a full-time employee.

We are still a new agency in this area, and we've been working hard to get our name out there. But we've been struggling to get enough patients to keep us all busy. A full-time employee is expected to have 25 visits per week. Last week she had 11, and I had 6 visits. Since the full-timer also gets benefits, the company doesn't want to pay her, and provide her benefits, for working less than full-time. They'd rather not pay me at all.

Apparently it doesn't matter that I've got more seniority than the full-time therapist. It doesn't matter that I've never called in sick or missed a scheduled visit. It doesn't matter that I've been searching out and bringing in many new referrals. It doesn't matter that I was hired early in the company's local history and was the only P.T. on staff for several months. In a just, perfect world it all would matter, but sometimes life is not fair.

The phone call with my boss ended with me in tears. She felt bad, but had no other choice. The business people who made the decision, she said, looked only at the numbers. I love my job. I like my company. I love my co-workers, and I like and respect my boss. I don't want to work someplace else. But I now have no other choice. Sometimes life is not fair.

I'm sad. I'm hurt. I'm scared. I know I will get through this, but in the meantime it sucks. It just sucks. I've already been living paycheck to paycheck, so I can't afford to waste any time. As soon as I finish this post, I'll be updating my resume and moving forward. I don't want to do it, but I will. There is no other way to go.

One foot in front of the other.
One foot in front of the other.