I'm just now reclining after a wonderful weekend with my boyfriend, D. He arrived Friday afternoon in time for us to catch dinner before going to a concert. I hadn't been to a concert in quite a long time. It was fun! On Saturday morning we lounged, exercised, and then lounged again before heading out to lunch at a highly recommended small town cafe about 25 minutes from here.

The recommendations were dead on. The food was delicious, and the desserts were amazing! We took our time, enjoyed our food, chatted with the owners, and watched the locals, who all knew each other, come and go before heading home. Saturday night we went to a movie and had a small, late dinner at a new Thai restaurant. Again, our food was wonderful. We were laughing at ourselves, as we joked about eating our way through southern Minnesota. I don't really cook, so when D is here we do eat out a lot. And we enjoy it.

After another lazy morning this morning, we took Jet for a long walk through the woods. We had a nice talk as we took in the crisp fall day. Snow is in the forecast, so that may have been our last opportunity to enjoy crisp air and a carpet of leaves. We had another good meal at one of our favorite  restaurants and spent part of the afternoon on the sofa watching a football game together. Halfway through the game, it was time for D to go. That's the hard part.

Living four hours apart is tough. I hate when we have to leave each other. We see each other so infrequently, less than once per month, I try to soak in every minute we're together. But that doesn't make separating any easier. After the long hug goodbye, one of us always has to walk out the door. It's not easy. Of course I feel sad when he goes, but I don't let myself wallow there. I've gotten pretty good at redirecting my thoughts. As I am now, reflecting on our time together brightens my mood.

I'm already looking forward to seeing D again, likely around Christmas, at which point we'll begin our weekend routine once again. Until we decide to take this relationship one step further, and one of us (me) makes a big move, this is the way it is. Love from a distance isn't easy, but I think we're making it work.