After my 10-miler yesterday morning, I was relaxing in the shower when it occurred to me I may have made a terrible mistake. D's birthday is in early May, but for the life of me, I couldn't remember the date! I just knew his birthday was in early May, and I was fairly certain I had forgotten it! Oh my.

By the time I exited the shower, my heart was heavy. I couldn't believe I could do something so dumb. I knew that if he had forgotten my birthday, I would have been devastated. But I don't know how men tick, exactly, so I quizzed the guy working in my house. And I quizzed my male co-workers. I even quizzed some of my elderly patients. They all made me feel a little better. The consensus was it would be no big deal to a guy. But I still felt bad.

I mean it's bad enough I forgot his birthday, but I didn't even know exactly which date it was that I had forgotten! My co-workers and I, and even many of our patients, had a good laugh over the entire situation! It made for good humor throughout the day in the therapy room.

Nevertheless, after I left work, I called D to apologize. He didn't answer, so I left him a message apologizing profusely for missing his birthday. I was honest. I had no excuses. I told him so, and then I went home and Googled some manly flowers to be delivered the next day, today.

I was looking at various flower bouquets when I heard back from D. It was late last night, so he sent a text. It ended with, "Birthday is tomorrow." In other words, his birthday was today, May 15th! I laughed out loud! After all that worry and fret. After admitting to everyone, including D, that I was kind of an insensitive dope, at least on this day and issue, it was all for naught! I hadn't missed his birthday after all!

My boyfriend, D, received a lovely bouquet of manly flowers, wishing him a happy birthday, at his office today. He was touched by my thoughtfulness. He told me it was a very nice thing to do. Of course, I'm still a bit of an insensitive boob for forgetting his birth date, but I don't think it fazed him a bit. And the resolution of my dilemma made for another lively, laughter-filled day in the therapy department!

Sometimes, it's best just to laugh. When I see D this weekend, I have a feeling more laughter will ensue. And that will be just fine with me. I like to laugh, even if it is at myself.