Although we ended up with 15.4 inches of snow a couple of days ago, as I look out into my backyard tonight, the grass is green and there is nary a white patch to be found. The snow turned to rain Friday, and it rained all day and into the night. The rain dispersed some of the snow, and the warm, bright sunshine we had today took care of the rest. I even got to run in shorts today!

I ran long yesterday, 15 miles, with my 7 x 800 meter repeats at 7 minute pace, which I never did do on Thursday, in the middle of my run. Combining my long run with speed work was an interesting challenge. I was pretty tired after my run and for the rest of the day. A nice Italian dinner last night with my parents helped perk me up. Good food and good company typically does that.

I slept late today. Wow, that was nice! Jet usually wakes me up just before 6:00 AM, but today he let me sleep until almost eight o'clock! The sun was already high in the sky by the time I made my coffee. I leisurely enjoyed my breakfast in the sun while watching Jet romp around outside. It was lovely.

By the time I hit the road this morning, it was past 10 o'clock. I had a relaxed, easy 7-mile recovery run. I kept a good pace with little effort, and my legs felt fairly fresh. Apparently, last night's Italian dinner helped me recover well from yesterday's effort. It was so great to run in warm sunshine. It was a beautiful day for a great run!

Tomorrow I start my level 2 kettlebell and suspension training class. I'm looking forward to getting back to it. I really sloughed off this past week without it. I know the level one class made me a lot stronger. This eight week class will take me through Grandma's Marathon, and I'm hopeful the added strength will help me run well there.

My mood continues to be good. Sorry, it's probably getting a little boring hearing that week after week, but I'll take boring over depression any day! The sun is setting on a beautiful day. I'm feeling well. Just for today, depression remains far far away.