As a result of ECT, or perhaps just due to the severity of this depression relapse, I recently discovered I had little recollection of what happened over the past few months. I couldn't answer the frequently posed question, "How did it start?" Fortunately, I have a blog. So I took a look back the other day. Don't worry, this is not going to be a post summarizing in gory detail my recent misery and despair. But it was interesting for me to rediscover how this relapse began and progressed.

It was interesting and strange, actually. I discovered I felt really good, even grateful, just a few days prior to my first post indicating something was wrong. This relapse seemingly began overnight. And the decent into hell was complete within just a few days. Those two things in and of themselves were strange. How does that happen?? But what was more strange was my reaction, or shall I say my lack of reaction, to my own words. It was odd.

I had 10 weeks of posts filled with increasingly desperate hopelessness and despair. The words were sometimes horrifyingly descriptive of an agonizing trek through depression, yet as I read them I felt very oddly detached. The words were just words. I wasn't feeling them at all. That seemed really weird and abnormal. Usually, when I read something with feeling, even something I wrote years ago, I sort of re-experience what my words were attempting to convey. But this time, nothing. And I mean nothing. I may as well have been reading The Declaration of Independence.

Now I'm not necessarily complaining. Perhaps my brain was protecting me. Perhaps it was saving me from re-living any of this hellish episode. But that possibility doesn't make it any less strange. I felt, and still feel, so detached (already) from what just happened. So detached I'm getting frustrated trying to put it into words. I was reading the words in my posts as an outsider looking into a life of which I could not relate. Isn't that weird?

Ironically, the only post that struck me just a bit was the poem I wrote entitled, "Just words." Like every other post I reviewed, I had forgotten I wrote that poem. And if I do say so myself, when I reread it I liked it. (I may even re-post it.) Now is there some meaning behind that irony? Perhaps, but I don't know what it is. Anyway, I don't know where I'm going with all of this, so I'll stop now. I was just really intrigued by feeling so detached from my own words detailing my own very recent past. And I don't really understand why.