I was confronted with infuriating ignorance during a meeting yesterday. This was a meeting of sober people. The person leading the meeting announced that one of our regular attendees was in the local mental health hospital. It's the same announcement I know was made when I was in the same hospital just a few short months ago. The announcement was made so others might pray for, visit, or send a card to the patient. These type of announcements are made whenever one of our members is sick or needs assistance. It was meant to inform.

Unfortunately, rather than stopping, the leader of the meeting went on to make several stupid "jokes" about the local mental health facility. For example, "I talked to the staff there, and they still let me out." Everybody laughed. Well, everybody except me.

I wasn't laughing, and the more he "joked" the angrier I got. He wouldn't have said any of the things he said if our friend was in the cancer unit. Nobody would have laughed if he had just announced our friend was sick with any illness other than mental illness. Why is it okay to laugh about a person being in a mental health inpatient unit? Why is an inpatient mental health unit funny? What's funny about it? Why didn't the others in the room, several of whom have co-occurring mental illnesses themselves, find the "jokes" at least distasteful? Was I overreacting?

Maybe I did overreact, but I'm so sick and tired of mental illness being the butt of jokes rather than a real health concern! How about some empathy, rather than chuckles, for our friend. A room full of people who have battled addiction should have known better!

I contemplated talking to the leader after the meeting, but I didn't. I think my feelings were too strong, and I'm not sure anything I said would have made any difference to this particular individual. I did talk to a close friend, who encouraged me to let it go, and to another individual, an individual who has also been hospitalized for mental illness. He was also offended but, like me, didn't say anything.

I tried to accept the leader's comments as pure ignorance and let go. Obviously, I've not been too successful at the letting go part of that equation. With time I'm sure I will let it go, but I'm curious what others, i.e. you, think. Am I being too sensitive? Should I have said something? And how do we combat this stigma and ignorance? Right now it feels overwhelming to me.