I began this blog one year ago, January 8, 2008. At the time, I didn't know a thing about blogging. I didn't have a clue how to create, organize, or "program" a blog. I knew nothing about attaching files, creating links, downloading videos, posting pictures, defining keywords, or understanding statistics. Readers, followers, feeds and subscribers were all foreign concepts. I am somewhat amazed to be here, now, 365 days later.

While I knew little about blogging, I did have a fairly clear idea of my motives one year ago. I've been reflecting on those motives the past couple days. I created this blog out of my passion to educate others about depression and mental illness. I hoped to connect with others who ran, trained, and raced despite suffering chronic mental illness. I wanted to enlighten "the world" about the inadequate healthcare coverage, nonexistent job security, and tremendous financial struggles faced by those with mental illness. I planned to highlight stigma and discrimination.

Over time, I discovered my desire to focus on recovery from, rather than wallowing in, these difficulties. Slowly, I attempted to incorporate an attitude of gratitude and tried to focus more on coping, solutions, and support. Depression sucks, but it doesn't mean our lives must suck all the time. The only reason I am still alive today is because I've learned to cope with this shitty illness! I hope this blog has helped at least a couple of you, too.

I'm proud to be writing here one year later. I'm pleased a few of you have found me, commented, subscribed, and hopefully found something useful in my words. I always enjoy hearing from you, and your comments have supported me more than you will ever know.

I am not an expert on depression, mental illness or recovery, but I am an expert on MY mental illness and recovery--most of the time! If you discovered something in my experience which resonated with you, helped or enlightened you; I couldn't ask for more than that. I thank you all for sticking with me throughout 2008. I'll be here tomorrow, and I hope you will be, too.