It is times like this when I wish everyone on the planet had at least one personal experience with clinical depression. If all those around us had at one time felt the complete and utter hopelessness, the crushing heaviness, the inability to move without huffing and puffing in search of more energy, the loneliness, the physical fatigue of pneumonia or the flu, without the other symptoms of pneumonia or flu, the loss of motivation to cook, wash, or dress... If this experience were a part of every life at least once, there would be no more stigma.

If depression were universally experienced, there would be no more invalidating comments. People wouldn't suggest that smiling more would cure you. There would be no more misunderstandings. Working only part time would not be questioned. Napping wouldn't be akin to laziness. Support in the way of food, chores, or simply companionship would be common place. If depression were seen as an illness; a diabolical, unpredictable, debilitating illness, no different than many types of cancer, for example, things would be different for all of us.

Home alone, as I've been for days, I'm exhausted, hopeless and overwhelmed. My sweatshirt and pants have seen better days, but who cares. A few days ago, it began. Since then I've been steam rolled by a particularly vicious episode of depression. It always amazes me how quickly this illness  attacks. And that's exactly what it feels like, an attack. How else can I describe something that came on so fast and ferociously? Life is bleeding from my soul. It sucks, and I hate it.

As usual, I'm doing what I can, but the options, like my world, feel like they're shrinking. I've been reaching out a bit, but I have a hard time with that. Who wants to hear from someone feeling like crap? There's nothing my friends can do, so I hesitate to bother them. I did make it out yesterday and had coffee with a friend. It was nice, but the effort left me flat on my back the rest of the day. Nonetheless, I know it was a good thing to do. I've walked Jet a bit, and when I can, I ride my stationary bike for 10 minutes at a time. It's not much, but it's better than nothing. I can't say it's helped, but at least I feel like I'm putting up a sliver of a fight.

My thinking is horrid at times like this. I don't want to die, but after days and nights filled with darkness and angst, I'd prefer not to wake up. Those are scary words, but they only begin to describe the dark thoughts banging around in my head. I have much to be grateful for, but this illness erases the good with glee. Only black, hopeless, shaming death do I see.

I'm in a bad place right now. I don't want to be here. I'm hanging on, but the fatigue is great and the resolve is weak. This is depression. It's ugly, messy, scary and misunderstood. Today my ugly, scary depression has me in it's grip. I'm struggling to free myself and eventually I will slip from it's slimy grasp. I will. I have to believe that. Prayers for all of us suffering with mental illness today.