The good news is my left calf did not hurt one bit during Saturday's marathon. It was absolutely fine. The rest, painful massages, Epsom salt ice baths, stretching, and prayers must have worked, for I didn't even feel a twinge of discomfort. Unfortunately, there is bad news as well. Despite the lack of expected calf pain, I did not finish the marathon. For only the third time in my life, I dropped out of a race.

DNF (Did Not Finish) are three letters I don't like to see following my name in any race result, but Saturday just wasn't my day. I have no other explanation than that. I felt great on Friday. I ate well, hydrated, and rested appropriately. The weather was nearly perfect Saturday morning. I felt ready and had only the typical nervous anticipation prior to the start. But I think that's where the normalcy ended. Shortly after the gun went off, I had an inkling something wasn't quite right.

Perhaps I started a bit too fast. Although my pace was nearly the same as I ran at Grandma's Marathon just two months ago, I couldn't catch my breath. I chalked it up to nervousness and tried to distract myself with some gratitude prayers. At each mile, throughout the mile, I thanked God for a different person in my life. The distraction worked until mile 5 when our flat course suddenly became gigantically hilly. It was a course change I hadn't expected. My quick pace bit me in the ass.

For the next three miles we summitted 4 hills, each one longer and steeper than the last. I hung in there up and over the first three hills, but by hill number four I was in distress. First of all, my GI system was off, which forced an emergent bathroom stop. Then the lengthy fourth hill slowed me to a walk half way from the top. The steep descent on the other side must have torn me up, too, because by the time our path flattened around mile 8, my legs were trashed. The hills were done, and so, I feared, was I.

It was more than just my legs giving way. My shortness of breath, which the hills exacerbated, never ceased. And my energy all but disappeared. I felt cooked, and I was only at mile 8! Dismayed, I tried to soldier on. I walked at mile markers. I joined up with other runners in hopes they would pull me along. I walked through water stops. I waited for the bad spot to pass. But Saturday, for whatever reason, the bad spot only worsened. Despite my pride in perseverance, stubbornness, and personal pep talks, my body just wouldn't go.

I ran and walked from miles 8 through 12 while still maintaining a reasonable pace. But after mile 13, in which I walked more than I ran, I finally gave up. I wasn't having fun. I knew if I continued it would be a really long day. So one hour and fifty five minutes into the race, at exactly mile 13.1, I dropped out. I was disappointed nearly to tears, but it was the right decision and knowing that kept my chin up. I caught a ride to the finish where D was waiting, first with surprise and then with a hug. My day was done.

This was a small blip of disappointment in an otherwise excellent weekend. Believe it or not, while I know I could have finished, I'm proud of myself for making what was probably the wiser decision. My focus now is on recovering, resting, and preparing better for October. After all, the Twin Cities Marathon is only 5 weeks away.