I'm staring at my Christmas cactus, which is drooping its shriveled segmented leaves over the side of its pot, and thinking, "Yup, that's exactly how I feel dude." Unfortunately, a glass of H2O won't bring me back to life. Trust me, I've tried that already.
I don't know what's going on. I am sleepy tired. As I told my doc today, if I don't get things done before 1:00 PM, it is unlikely they will get done at all. After 1:00 PM, it takes every ounce of energy just to stay awake! And I'm not just tired. I'm nonfunctional! Nothing works. My body is tired. My brain is tired. I can't think. I can't make decisions. I don't want to eat anything except chocolate and ice cream. I don't care about anything (very dangerous for me!) like goals or commitments. Everything is just too much work! It sucks! It's like an acute attack of depression. Weird.

We thought the fatigue was my usual menstrual cycle crap, but if that was the cause, it would have lifted by now. My psychiatrist cut back one of my meds, although I've been on it for a year so it's also unlikely the cause. I feel low on fuel, but it is very unlikely I am anemic. I've frequently been checked during episodes like this in the past, and my hemoglobin has never even been close to low. Plus, I take a multi-vitamin, eat pretty well, and have been increasing my protein intake to accommodate for the increased running. Tonight, I had a steak. I'll have another tomorrow. Red meat (iron) has always helped boost me when I've been fatigued from training in the past, but even steak hasn't been a reliable cure this time. The fatigue just won't let go.

Since it won't let go, I am once again forced to accept the unacceptable. I have no choice but to acquiesce to this debilitated state, but I don't like it. I don't like it at all. I used to fight, but what good would that do? Puttin' up my dukes would only squander more precious energy. In the end, I'd still be flat on my back pissin' and moanin', and I'd have accomplished even less. Instead, I'm trying to accept. I'm trying to do when I can, and stop when I can't do any more. I'm nowhere near perfect at this acceptance thing, but (un)fortunately I've been getting extra practice time recently.

Maybe I should have titled this post Battling Acceptance...