Like so many inspirational stories before this one, the piece I just read includes a description of the author weaning herself from all anti-depressant medication. I loved the story. It was very inspirational. I generally love stories about people conquering any mental illness. The author of this piece described how running keeps her mood elevated and prevents the return of depression's darkness. I get it.

As the author notes, and as I've written about previously, exercise has been shown to improve mood in those with depression. But why does every inspirational story seem to include an either-or medication dilemma? Why don't we highlight stories which include the use of medication as part of a successful treatment plan?

The author of this story never suggested that people shouldn't use meds. She noted her negative side effects. She pointed out that anti-depressants often lose effectiveness over time, and for her they just didn't do the trick. Unfortunately, I fear people reading her story will conclude that meds aren't effective and/or aren't necessary. It's nicer to believe that depression can be cured by thinking happy thoughts and exercising. But meds are effective, and for many of us they are absolutely necessary.

Like the author, I use running to cope with my depression. However, running is not my sole therapy. I believe I take fewer meds because I run, but without meds my depression takes over. My depression requires medication, sobriety, and talk therapy to stay in check. Running is just one piece of a successful treatment plan. I'd like to read an inspirational story which includes medication, if only to dispel the myth that anti-depressants aren't needed if one lives right.

And that's the problem, the myth that anti-depressants aren't necessary if you just ________. Fill in the blank with any of the following: pray, laugh, smile, think happy thoughts, exercise... But anti-depressants, just like anti-cancer drugs, do work for many of us. Taking meds does not indicate a moral failure or lack of effort on the part of the sufferer. Unfortunately, every time I read a great story about someone conquering depression, and part of the story describes "weaning" off medication, I fear the myths about combating this illness are reinforced.

What do you think?