In less than 3 weeks, I'll be running my next marathon. It's taper time. Tapering is when I gradually reduce my mileage and effort over the final 3 weeks prior to the marathon. Hopefully, that will leave my legs fresh for race day. I'm following the exact same plan I followed prior to the Dallas Marathon two months ago, so I'm feeling pretty confident that I'll be ready on race day. Tapering is a nice reward for all the hard work which goes into preparing for the marathon.

I'm really looking forward to Austin. I hope the current nasty weather passes by then, and there will be nothing but sun! I need some good, warm sunshine! It was really sunny here today, but in Minnesota in January, that usually means it's extra cold outside. And it was. So I'm looking forward to a tiny break from winter. I think it will help keep my mood stable, and I hope it will propel me through the rest of winter.

This weekend is a big weekend for me. Yes, it's Super Bowl Sunday, and I love that. But I've got an even bigger event occurring Saturday night. It will be Cake Night. Once a month, my home AA group has Cake Night to celebrate the previous month's yearly sobriety anniversaries. Technically, I should have attended in January, as my sobriety anniversary is in December, but I like to wait until February when my sponsor celebrates her anniversary, too. And we'll be celebrating together--me 5 years, her 21 years--on Saturday night.

This is an extra special Cake Night for me. I invited all of the professionals who've been on this depression, alcoholism and recovery journey with me. With the exception of my psychiatrist, who wanted to attend but will be out of town, they are all coming! My psychologist, my social worker, and staff from my outpatient treatment center are all going to be there. I invited my treatment team, as well as my friends, in order to recognize and thank them. Mental health professionals are not always looked upon favorably by some in the AA crowd. Having the professionals there with me to celebrate sobriety will allow me to give them the credit they deserve. Without my treatment providers I would not be here today. Period. They deserve to be thanked for that, and I can't wait.

Life is moving right along. Financially, I'm still stressed, but I've picked up some extra hours to help alleviate some of that stress. Alleviating the stress never occurs fast enough for me, but I'm trying to be patient. This too shall pass. After all, life is moving right along. And right now, it seems to be moving in a favorable direction.