     This is a short post but I felt it would be important to list some good resources since I will be posting about some very difficult topics. Please keep in mind that this is but a fraction of the resources out there. The ones that have made my list are ones I have used or researched thoroughly. I have listed below some general information sources, help lines, and other advocacy and support sites.
     I would also like to state that even though I will be posting about topics including self-harming and suicide I DO NOT in anyways support these actions. I DO NOT recommend those actions. The stories of mine that I share were/are painful and dark times in my life and within my depression. I DO NOT judge anyone who has or does the same, because I have been there. However I believe life is precious and that there are healthier ways to cope without the use of self-harm or in turning to suicide. If you self-harm or are suicidal I ask you to consider some of the resources listed below.

National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 

1-800-273-8255 

suicidepreventionlifeline.org

 ☙ 

 Anxiety and Depression Association of America 
A non-profit that has a good section of info on the range of anxiety related disorders including social anxiety, panic attacks, and PTSD. 
 www.adaa.org

 ☙ 

 American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
 A good resource for info about suicide and suicide prevention that really promotes the need to have important and sometimes difficult conversations. 
 afsp.org 

☙ 

 Celebrate Recovery
 A Christ-centered 12 step recover program and support network that covers chemical addictions as well as emotional struggles like self-harm and suicide recovery. So when you read me talking about my chips, this is the program I get them from.
www.celebraterecovery.com

 ☙

 Families for Depression Awareness 
Offers education, training, and support for families of those coping with depression and trying to prevent a loved ones suicide. 
familyaware.org

 ☙ 

National Institute of Mental Health 
A good recourse for general information on a wide range of mental health issues including anxiety, depression, and suicide prevention.
www.nimh.nih.gov 

 ☙ 
 Self-Injury Outreach & Support 
A non-profit outreach initiative providing information and resources about self-injury. I personally like their page on coping techniques to resist the urge to cut. 
 sioutreach.org

 ☙ 

 To Write Love On Her Arms
 A wonderful resource with great stories and a positive message. It is a nonprofit with a message of hope and a goal of finding help for people struggling with depression, addiction, self-injury, and suicide. 
twloha.com 

     Hopefully this gives you a little bit of an idea of what resources are out there and available to those of us dealing with depression, self-harm, and more.

 ~Samantha Lou