One of the tenets of my program of recovery is, "Do not make decisions based on fear." My friends have been reminding me of this lately. Well, as I wrote here a few days ago, I am fearful. I am in the middle of salary negotiations for a job I'm not certain I want because I am afraid I no longer possess the skills necessary to perform it well. Yet I know I can't stay at my current job, as the environment there is just too negative and unsupportive. So I'm stuck, and I need to make a decision.

If I decide not to take the new position, I would definitely be going against the basic tenet. My decision not to take the job would be totally based on fear. The major reason not to take the new position is because I am afraid I can't do it. Other than that, it's really a no-brainer.

My fears, in reality, are likely unfounded. I know eventually my discomfort would abate, my fear would subside, and I would settle into my new role. So what am I afraid of? Well, I've discovered I'm actually afraid of being afraid!

I don't like to be uncomfortable. I don't like to feel afraid. I'd like to avoid both discomfort and fear at all costs. So I'm actually afraid of feeling uncomfortable and afraid! New jobs are always scary and uncomfortable. And I do have some legitimate concerns about my forgotten skills. But if I'm really honest, I am most afraid of, and I most want to avoid being scared.

Unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately (because it forces me to face my fear), staying at my current job is also quite uncomfortable. It is uncomfortable for very different reasons, but it's uncomfortable nonetheless. Yet choosing to stay in my current situation would be easier, and in a way more comfortable, than leaving for this new position. Weird! It's confusing. It's sticky. It all makes this a very difficult decision to make. No wonder I feel stuck!

Stuck or not, I'm leaning strongly toward leaving. If we can work out the salary details, which I could have accomplished tonight had I called the regional manager back, I think I will take the new position. In a way, I feel like I need to take it in order to challenge myself, in order to work through this fear.

In doing so, I have to remember another crucial component of my program, faith. I can only make my best decision, and I must leave the rest to God. It will work out as it should. I must, regardless of the decision I make, have faith in that.