So I got tagged by crackedheadblog today. I actually got this awhile back with specific questions, and since questions are easier on my brain, I am going to go with them--instead of the random thoughts crackedheadblog so nicely used.

The rules are:
1. The rules of the game get posted at the beginning.
2. Each player answers the questions about themselves.
3. At the end of the post, the player then tags 5-6 people and posts their names, then goes to their blogs and leaves them a comment, letting them know they’ve been tagged and asking them to read your blog.
4. Let the person who tagged you know when you've posted your answer.

1) What was I doing 10 yrs ago?
I was in the first full year of my new career as a physical therapist, and my spouse and I were just beginning the bid process on what became our first home.

2) What are 5 things on my to-do list for today (not in any particular order):
1. Laundry
2. Run 5 miles at tempo pace
3. Wash the dishes
4. Get a haircut
5. Go to an AA meeting

3) Snacks I enjoy:
Popcorn--the old-fashioned way, popped on the stove in a pot. Cold cereal. Chocolate pudding.

4) Things I would do if I were a billionaire:
Purchase a home on the north shore of Lake Superior and on the ocean. Travel the world. Volunteer in Africa. Build a public running track in my town. Develop a foundation to financially assist the mentally ill and the working poor. Practice random acts of kindness with people down on their luck.

5) Three of my bad habits:
1. Chew my fingernails--occasionally! It's getting better!
2. Eating too much chocolate.
3. Procrastinating--especially if fearful.

6) 5 places I have lived:
1. Cambridge, MA
2. Duluth, MN
3. Winter, WI
4. Meadowlands, MN
5. Belmont, MA

7) 5 jobs I have had:
1. Dishwasher in local restaurant
2. Housekeeper at ski resort
3. Video store clerk
4. Mental health program coordinator
5. Orthopedic physical therapist

8) 5 peeps I wanna know more about:
1. depression introspection
2. letting go
3. untreatable
4. bpd in okc
5. beartwinsmom