What a way to start May--I ran a PR in a 15K race today. I averaged 7:43 per mile and finished in 1:11:47. It was a small field, but I was the seventh woman overall and third in my age group.

The 1:11:47 was quite a nice surprise. I really had no idea what to expect today. The race was 9.3 miles long, and I hadn't run more than 6 miles since early December. I didn't know how triathlon training, including only 2-3 running days per week, would translate in a distance race. I guess I must be doing something right, because even with this extra weight I'm carrying around, I was still able to run relatively fast. Last year, I finished this same race in 1:15, Like I said, a PR 1:11 was a nice surprise.

Now I'm trying to figure out how to fit in the rest of the weekend's work. Between tonight and tomorrow I need to swim a 60 minute interval workout, bike 60 minutes, mow my lawn, attend softball practice, and prepare for this week's patients. I'm feeling just a bit overwhelmed! Could I have another weekend day, please?

After the race today, I came home and demolished the one remaining wall and section of ceiling in my basement. That was a little tougher than I had anticipated, but I got all the plaster, Sheetrock, and wood out and to the dump. My basement is now totally ready to be re-finished, a process that will hopefully start within the next few weeks. I'm a bit alarmed at how much it's going to cost, but I'm tired of being without my exercise/rec room and additional bathroom down there. (My basement flooded 3 years ago, and I had to demolish and remove everything secondary to mold.) It'll be nice to have a whole house again.

With tomorrow's busy-ness looming, I think I'll sign off for now. I may try to get my biking in tonight, but I think I'll just use my stationary bike rather than going outside. I don't think my tired legs will handle hills very well tonight or tomorrow. Of course, I may choose to sit and watch Law and Order re-runs instead!
Have a great evening.

Success means doing the best we can with what we have. Success is the doing, not the getting; in the trying, not the triumph. Success is a personal standard, reaching for the highest that is in us, becoming all that we can be.--Zig Ziglar