D was here over the weekend. He arrived Friday and left yesterday. We had a wonderful time together. It was so nice, I'm missing him a bunch today.

We ran an 11 mile race Saturday morning, which went fairly well for both of us. It was a gorgeous morning for a run, and we ran on a beautiful, woodsy, paved trail. We're both training for marathons right now, and this race fit right into our training schedules. We spent time before and after the race socializing with the other runners. I am lucky to be a part of a very kind, fun loving, running community. It was a nice way to start the day.

Shortly after arriving home and cleaning ourselves up, we left for another adventure. I arranged for us to do the ropes course at a local environmental learning center Saturday afternoon. First we took in the main street of a small, charming town nearby. They were having a weekend celebration, so there was a lot going on. We took in the sights, did a little shopping, and had a little to eat before heading for the ropes course.

The ropes course consisted of six "events" 30-feet in the air. The course is in the middle of the woods, on a 200 foot bluff, so you walk among the tree tops while out there. It starts with walking from one 30-foot tower to another on a long log and finishes with a stroll along a single wire before taking a zip line back to earth. It was awesome!

I'm not afraid of heights, and of course I was safely harnessed into two overhead wires while up there, so I was surprised at how nervous I got. The log was pretty easy, but the second event was called the Cherry Picker, and it was nerve-wracking! By the time I finished, I was dripping with sweat. D had the same experience. It was really challenging but really fun, too. We were both glad we went. I'd like to go again.

We wrapped up Saturday with a lovely dinner at one of my favorite restaurants. After our busy day it was nice to get dressed up and have a really good, relaxed meal. Yesterday we spent time outside with Jet. We went for a long walk around a small lake and even took him out for coffee with us. It was difficult when it was time for D to go. But we had a really nice weekend. I'm already looking forward to seeing him again.