My parents, who go south for the winter, are back in Minnesota for the summer. My mom is in my kitchen right now making one of her specialties, spaghetti, which is fabulous despite the fact we don't have a stitch of Italian in us! I love when she cooks for me. She always makes a ton so I can freeze the leftovers! In fact, I think I still have one container of spaghetti sauce in my freezer from last Fall!

It's nice to see my mom and stepfather again. They leave Minnesota and go south in late October, so it's been awhile. They'll be around here for a few days, or weeks, and then go further north where they will settle for the summer. I'm hoping to head up there to fish with them as often as possible over the next few months. I love fishing.

As for the rest of my life, I don't think there's anything new to report. Despite looking forward to it, I had a tough 20-miler on Saturday. My legs and lungs handled the distance nicely, but I suffered from significant GI distress, which turned my three hour run into a four hour and five minute ordeal. I had to make multiple bathroom stops, which was frustrating, but I was happy with how the rest of my body felt. I've begun taking some probiotics. Hopefully they will help keep the GI distress under control from now on.

Work is going very well. I was just telling my stepfather that I've been honored to work with several WWII veterans recently. Some of them were true war heroes. I'm always thrilled when one of them willingly shares a bit of his story. I've been enjoying working with them.

My mood is still holding steady. I feel good. I've felt so steady, dare I say so normal, for so long now, I sometimes find myself thinking, "Maybe this is it. Maybe it's over. Maybe after 12 years the depression has taken its ball and gone home alone." Maybe. Wouldn't that be amazing? Sure, it would, but I don't spend much time with those thoughts. I smile and let them pass. It is what it is today, and that's all I've got. And all I have to worry about. Now.