As I grieve the loss of my relationship and my summer racing season, friends, family and professionals have been going out of their way to remind me that "sadness is normal." To all of them I say, "I know." I guess they are collectively worried I will confuse sadness with an onset of depression. But if there is anyone on the planet who knows there is a difference between normal sadness and irrational depression, it is me.

I've been sad. There are definitive reasons for my sadness. First and foremost, I am grieving the loss of my 4-year relationship with my boyfriend, D. While discontinuing our relationship may have been the right thing to do, as I wasn't getting the affection I needed, it doesn't make the loss any less sad. We had many wonderful moments together. I will miss D. I will survive, but I am still sad.

I am also grieving the current and future loss of running secondary to my partially torn Achilles. Losing the ability to run leaves me very frustrated and sad. The possibility of a depression relapse exists, of course, as a result of this issue, as running is vital to my mental health. I know that. My antennae are up. But right now, I am just sad. Plain, old, normal sad...

Sadness in response to a particular event, issue, or loss is a normal feeling. I'm not worried about my sadness at this point in time. I'd be more worried if I wasn't feeling sad. I'll also be more concerned if the sadness continues for an unreasonable length of time. But right now my sadness is clearly related to my recent life events. My sadness is different than my depression.

My depression is rarely "normal." It often seems to have a will separate from what's actually occurring in my life. It has occasionally set in after some triggering event (like being injured), but often it comes and goes without regard for what's happening. For example, it all began 14+ years ago when my life was more of less fabulous. I had a job, a house, a spouse, money in the bank, and a gaggle of friends. Depression, irrationally, set in nonetheless. That is the nature of depression.

My illness, depression, is not the same as my current feeling, sadness. I realize I am always at risk for depression. The illness is with me regardless of how I'm feeling, happy, sad, loving, or lonely. Right now I am sad. I have reason to be sad. And I'm okay with being sad. In some ways, it's actually nice to feel "normal" sadness. It's a relief. I am not relapsing into the black hole of depression. I'm just feeling sad. I can deal with that. I'll be okay. Thank you for your support, my friends.