While I am still in the hospital receiving more assistance with this episode of depression, I wanted to use this post to focus on my gratitude. I am grateful for my doctor. I am feeling a little more hopeful because the new medication my intelligent and compassionate psychiatrist added last week seems to be doing the trick. My thinking has mellowed. Perhaps my broken brain is beginning to be bandaged.

I am grateful for my social worker who is nothing short of amazing. She assisted me with a very important appointment yesterday, an event I never could have undertaken myself. And she does that for me routinely! I seriously don't know how I would get by without her.

I am grateful for the nursing staff on this mental health unit. They, without a thought, continue to be so helpful and empathetic, it often amazes me. No matter my mood; sad, cranky, irritable, or filled with despair, they have kind words to offer, plans for improvement, and a gentleness that encourages me no matter how discouraged I may be. They make a difficult job look easy.

I am grateful for my friends, especially my friend, Wendy, who is also nothing short of amazing. Despite my faulty Minnesota attitude of, "I can do this by myself, thank you very much," she has continued to assist me, even when I haven't made assisting me very easy. Wendy has helped me with everything from emergency room visits to housing. She is currently taking care of my dog, Jet, who can be a handful to say the least. All of my friends, even my co-workers, have offered non-judgemental and heartfelt support. I am fortunate to be surrounded by such individuals.

Finally, I want to thank all of you. Again. Without your readership, comments, and now donations (14 donations from all over the world), I don't know that I'd still be willing or motivated to keep moving forward. You may not believe this, but you guys do keep me going. I am humbled by your continued support. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Today, I choose to focus on gratitude. I have plenty of problems on which I could choose to focus, but I find my heart filled with hope and peace by focusing on what I have instead. I am one lucky woman. Many in this world have hardships far beyond anything I've ever faced. I have a nasty, chronic, challenging illness, but I have so much more than that. Gratitude today. That's where I'm at. Thank you, God. Thank you, everyone.