Why is it so difficult to ask for help? I know I am not the only one who finds the prospect of asking others for assistance distasteful. In fact, I grew up in a region of the country, among a nationality of people, who are known for, "No, no, I'm okay. Everything is fine." Meanwhile the barn is burning down behind them. (Anyone out there listen to Garrison Keillor on Prairie Home Companion? He's not making up that attitude!) The point is, asking others for help is not one of my strengths.

Unfortunately for me, despite my distaste for needing assistance from others, I am now in a position where I need help. Despite my best efforts, this depression episode has me in a precarious financial position. My financial reality is grim. My first hospital admission was September 30, 2013. I have not worked one hour since then. Unfortunately, as of November 1st, both my accrued vacation time and my employer-provided disability benefit were exhausted. In other words, I no longer receive a paycheck. I have been without an income for five weeks, and that is not going to change any time soon.

Let me tell you a little about myself. I am a very proud woman. I value taking care of myself financially. I have an almost perfect credit score, do not use credit cards, and have rarely, if ever, been late paying a bill. Unfortunately, I do have debt. My house, my vehicle, student loans, healthcare loans, Jet's surgery loan, as well as normal household bills keep me on my toes. Fortunately, I do have a small amount of money saved. Rather than use it for the new garage siding for which it was intended, I am now using it to pay my monthly bills. Soon, my pride will be tested, as all of my financial accounts hit zero.

Since it looks like I may not be returning to work soon, my social worker and I have begun the 3-4 month process of applying for social security disability. Whether or not I will be approved is any body's guess. I am trying to remain calm, to stay in today, but my stress as I look into the future has begun to climb. And this is why and where I need to ask for help.

Despite my value of financial independence, I have placed a donation link on my blog today. The link will take you to PayPal, and a donation in any amount can be made. If you are interested in helping out, I will humbly accept your good will. I will use the donations to pay my bills. That's it. Every dollar received will go toward keeping me in my house with the heat on and the lights glowing,  supplying groceries to eat, and paying my healthcare bills. I will be seeking deferments of my loans, but most of my bills simply must be paid, or I will lose what I've worked so hard to gain.

Placing a donation link on my blog was an extremely difficult decision to make, and I likely would not have done it without significant encouragement from those closest to me. But now it's done, and as I said, should you choose to use it, I will graciously and humbly accept your assistance during this difficult time. I thank all of you for taking time out of your day to read, comment on, and support me through my little blog. My gratitude is enormous.