I know I said it was only going to be a training run, and I may not run beyond the 20-mile mark, but I am preparing today as if I will be competing in and finishing my 21st marathon tomorrow. I know myself pretty well, and unless my run is going very badly, I know I will have a difficult time walking off the course tomorrow. Nevertheless, that is still the plan. I will run the first 20 miles conservatively, as my final 20 mile training run for Grandmas Marathon in June, and only finish the final 6.2 miles if I am feeling well.

I do hope all goes well, and I am going to sincerely try to stick to my game plan. I'd like to run the first 8-10 miles just under 9 minutes per mile. If I can stick to that plan, I should have plenty of energy to complete miles 10-20 at a pace somewhere between 8:30 and 8:45. And if I can stick to that pace, I should be able to complete the entire race without hurting my chances of running well at Grandmas.

The weather for tomorrow looks a bit iffy. It may be perfect. It may rain. The temp is supposed to be around 50-60 degrees, which is great, but there is also the possibility of rain and wind. That would not be great. I'm having a difficult time figuring out what to wear. I think I'm going to go with shorts, tank top, and long sleeve shirt. If I get warm, I'll have to tie the shirt around my waist, but if I go without the long sleeve shirt and it rains, I'll likely get too cold. I'm sure my clothing dilemma is quite fascinating to you, but this is what one goes through the day before a marathon. It's not very exciting.

Besides my clothing options, which are laid out in my bedroom, I've got my number, gels, watch and sunglasses on the kitchen table ready to go. I'm sure I'll go through and reorganize everything at least once more before I go to bed. I've already eaten my main pre-marathon meal, so the rest of the day will be bananas, a little rice, and possibly some yogurt. I'm very worried about my recent battles with GI distress returning tomorrow, so I'm trying to eat bland food conservatively. Let's hope that helps.

Other than marathon preparation, I have little else to report today. My mood continues to be good. Jet continues to be hilarious. Work is going well. I am really enjoying my patients and co-workers these days. And hopefully tomorrow will leave me feeling excited and confident for my future running and racing. Life is good.

If you live in the USA, don't forget to thank a veteran this weekend. I work with many amazing, humble WWII veterans everyday. I think we sometimes take our freedom, and everything that goes along with it, for granted. Were if not for the sacrifices of our veterans, the freedom we enjoy today might not be guaranteed. Thank you vets! I appreciate your service.