I've now missed a week and a half of work due to this pneumonia. I thought I'd go back yesterday, but after showering and getting ready, I was having a hard time breathing and feeling lightheaded. I called my doctor, and she asked me to come in.

Turns out I still had a slight fever, and I wasn't getting oxygen into my lower lungs. We took a chest x-ray, which was essentially normal, but my oxygen saturation (the amount of oxygen in my blood) was only 92-94%. I'm normally at 99-100 percent. My doctor had me do a nebulizer treatment and added another antibiotic to the one I'm already taking. The nebulizer opened up my lungs, although it made me even more lightheaded, and I was able to breathe a lot better within a few hours.

I feel guilty about missing so much work. I am the only PT at my rural facility, and it's challenging for my boss to find a substitute when I'm gone. I'm also concerned because I have a patient who is dying. He's a very special man who has grabbed a piece of my heart. I want to spend some time with him before he dies. I'd be very sad if he passed before I could make it back to work. I'm planning to return to work tomorrow. I really hope I feel well enough to do so.

Besides work, my life is suffering because of this damn pneumonia! It's been so cold that I haven't dared walk outside with Puck--both for his sake and mine. I know my lungs couldn't handle it, and I'm not sure about Puck's feet, either.

My inability to exercise has caused my weight to shoot upward. I'm now heavier than I've ever been, again. It was only one month ago that I was shedding pounds. UGH! It's going to take a lot of work to regain my fitness and my shape.

My house has also suffered. It is a mess. I'm going to try to work on that problem today. I was able to do a couple loads of laundry yesterday. That helped a little bit. Hopefully, I'll find enough energy to do a little cleaning between naps today. I know I'll feel better if my house is in order.

The bottom line? Don't get pneumonia! Seriously, I do feel better today. I hope I am finally on the mend. I'd really like to get my life back!