Well, it's been a few days of hell around here. Tracking down and contacting plagiarizers, contacting web hosts, filling out official forms for Google, and generally stressing out has been exhausting. I feel like I did everything I could do, and fortunately both offending websites stopped using my content. I think I'm lucky. Since this began, I've read countless horror stories from others who've been plagiarized and not had the same resolution. I guess I'm grateful the people I contacted took appropriate action, even though it was their inappropriate action which created the situation. I must once again thank Mohican for the amazing detective work and assistance. And thank you all for your ongoing support.

Okay. Enough about that! Onward and upward. I had a killer workout this morning. At 5:15 I stepped onto the treadmill for a 30 minute hill and interval workout. Ouch! It was a leg and lung burner. Then we had a power yoga class. I love power yoga, but doing 45 minutes of yoga after killer intervals was a lot tougher than I thought it would be. Whew. I was glad to be done this morning! I came home and collapsed on the floor next to Puck before I could even get ready for work. I was a little late for work... Tomorrow calls for 60 minutes on the bike followed by a 1/2 mile swim.

Speaking of work...still no word from my potential new employer. I'll call tomorrow if I don't hear anything. My current job, however, is going well. Things have been much more relaxed around there lately. One of my assistants--the one with a strong personality--left a couple weeks ago. It's made a huge difference. The department stress level has decreased while the teamwork has increased. It's amazing that one person could make such a big difference, but clearly that was the case here. It's much nicer to go to work now.

I'm off to bed now. I'll leave you with this. It's from a necklace I got from my friends at Christmas. The world finds hope in those who wish for a better life and have the courage to follow their star wherever it may lead.