In my last post I was fretting about my fragility and longing to be normal. Well, not too much has changed in the past couple days. I'm still worried about my mood. It's still not up to par with where I was a few weeks ago. For example, I ran 15 miles this morning. It was a really good run, too. My last two miles were faster than the pace of the previous thirteen. That's always nice. I felt great immediately after the run, but that hasn't held. I've been sinking ever since.

My psychiatrist, who I saw yesterday, is concerned. She wants to increase one of my meds again. We decreased it a few weeks ago. It was making me gain weight. I didn't like that. Obviously, I balked at increasing it. She respected that, but if my mood continues to slide, I'm pretty sure I won't have much of a choice the next time I see her. And that's okay, I guess. I trust her, and I doubt I'd be alive without her. I'm grateful for her compassion, assistance, and excellence.

While I was running this morning, I was thinking about my last post and "normalcy." I wonder how many years I'd have to go without a significant dip in my mood to lose the mistrust of the future. I wonder how long it would take for me to gain the air of certainty that my plans would come to fruition. I wonder if I'll ever stop expecting the other shoe to drop. I wonder.

Ideally, I suppose I should stop wondering and begin working on acceptance. After all, I have only so much control over what direction this illness will take. I can't imagine how miserable I might be if I didn't exercise, eat right, stay sober, and attempt to keep my life stress low. The fact that I still suffer, despite taking these steps, should help me accept this is a biological, physiological illness. So why do I still get stuck feeling like it's a character defect?

Boy, I'm all over the map with this post today. I guess that's consistent with my racing brain right now. It's all over the place, too. Another sign I'm not doing the best... I'll close by thanking all of you for visiting my little blog. I appreciate it. I hope something I said makes life today a little easier for at least one of you.