Parts of the following post were taken from a post I wrote on 2/2/08, which was also about dating.

Being a recovering alcoholic and person with depression, I don't find the bar-scene too inviting. So, I met a man online, and we had a date tonight. Here's the problem, the question, the conundrum...When do I drop the "D-bomb" on the guy? He thinks I'm swell; smart, funny, charming, sexy, blah, blah, blah... But just how sweet, charming and sexy will I be when I add depression to my list of attributes? How about chronic, debilitating, treatment-resistant, don't-have-enough-energy-to-brush-my-teeth depression? Charming? Sexy? Sweet? I don't think so!

This is such an anxiety-producing dilemma for me. Tonight, I let this guy get to know me up to a point. He doesn't realize I come with "a catch." I don't feel like I was honest nor totally dishonest with this very nice man. In fact, this whole process is painfully bittersweet. So far, this guy has gotten to know the person I used to be. I can still be that person, but only occasionally and for short periods of time. In reality, I no longer am that person. It's just an old, familiar role. And as I found out tonight, it's a whole lot easier to play the role via e-mail than in person.

In person, it takes a lot of energy to play the role of ME--the me I used to be. Me minus depression. If I act the part for for too long it absolutely wipes me out. At some point, I have to tell this guy. I like him. He likes me. Will he also like me--the me with depression? It's ridiculous, really! Obviously, if he can't handle it he's not a person I want to be associated with. But if not him, who? Major depression is not a selling point! Depression is just one more thing that is wrong with me.

I'm tired of having something wrong with me. I'm tired of having to explain what's wrong with me. Sometimes I wish I could go back to being me--the me without conditions, precautions or excuses. But then again, maybe he wouldn't like the old me. Looking back, I don't like the old me. In most ways the new me...even the new me with depression is a lot better person.