I had a wonderful time at my Cake Night Saturday night. My friend Cindy really spoke from her heart and introduced me with very kind words. I was quite humbled. When I took the podium, I had three pages of notes from which to choose appropriate comments. I told you I was fretting about this! In the end, I have no idea what I said. I know I thanked all of my guests for their roles in my recovery, but I'm not sure it was  eloquent nor even coherent!

I did have a great night. I was so humbled and honored by the presence of so many of those on my treatment team. It really was special. I hope it was nice for them to see me outside of an office, as the person I am today is a direct result of their efforts. Overall, it was a fun, funny, festive evening with lots of smiles, laughter, and hugs.

I ran my last long run before Austin on Saturday as well. I didn't feel very well throughout the run, but I finished the 15 miles anyway. My friend, Renee, joined me for 12 miles. That was nice. I have a couple of fast workouts this week and then it's all downhill until race day. I think I'm ready. I hope it's warm and sunny in Texas by then!

I interviewed and hired a dog sitter for Puck tonight. I'm such a nervous mom when it comes to leaving my boy. The young guy I hired is an experienced dog sitter, and Puck seemed very comfortable with him. I feel better about leaving Puck and my house knowing someone will be here taking care of both. But I still don't like leaving Puck. Like I said, I'm a bit of a Nervous-Nelly when it comes to my boy.

And now it's time for me to give my boy some attention, so I must go. Until we meet again, consider this quote. It certainly speaks to me.

Gratitude unlocks the fullness of life. It turns what we have into enough, and more. It turns denial into acceptance, chaos to order, confusion to clarity. It can turn a meal into a feast, a house into a home, a stranger into a friend. Gratitude makes sense of our past, brings peace for today, and creates a vision for tomorrow.--- Melody Beattie