I am now back in my living room after 5 days in northern Wisconsin at the lake with my boyfriend, D. You'll have to forgive me for being out of touch. I quite enjoyed being out of contact, actually. My cell phone didn't even ring or vibrate once while I was gone! My friends and family knew I was away, and they apparently decided to let me be away. So it was me, D, Jet, and D's adult son for most of the past 5 days. And it was beautiful!

D has a lovely home on a lake. While there, we introduced Jet to woods, water, and deer. We went boating. Jet wasn't sure he approved of that, but he relaxed a bit the second time we took him out. We water skied. My forearms are sore today from hanging onto the tow rope! We ran and walked on the trails. D planned and cooked all of our meals, which were delicious. We played games. We tried to sit around the fire, but the mosquitoes got the best of us, so that didn't last long. We watched movies, read, talked and relaxed.

My relationship with D is going very well. We are more and more comfortable with each other. It's so nice when we are together. This is only the second time in the past 2+ years that we've been together for more than a weekend. It seems we are both willing to put in the time and effort required to make this relationship work, especially considering how little time we get to spend together. I'm so grateful for D and for our relationship. Plus, having this healthy relationship is another example of sticking a middle finger in the face of my depression!

I tried to post some pictures in this post, but they keep coming out sideways, even though I've saved them to my computer in an upright position. Oh well, you'll just have to trust me. I had a wonderful, beautiful, relaxing vacation. Unfortunately, I must get back to life now, and that includes doing my household chores and getting my body and soul ready to go back to work tomorrow. Returning to my routine is always tough, and since procrastinating won't help, I guess I better get started.