A few weeks ago, I had a wacky thought and joined an online dating site. I don't know what I was thinking. I was quickly overwhelmed and left the site within a few days. But just before I left, I met someone. We had our first date last week. He took me to lunch at one of the finer restaurants in town. As usual, I was worried. When do I tell him about being in recovery? How do I introduce the fact that I have depression? What if he discovers my blog? These and many other questions were racing through my head as I prepared to meet him for the first time.

Fortunately for me, I met a rather enlightened individual. We had a nice time together, and when we parted, it was with the intent of seeing each other again. Despite my wishes to the contrary, after spending more than three hours together, he knew almost everything there is to know about me. He asked many, many questions, and I answered him honestly each time. All of my history came out. He even knew about this blog, but only that it was about depression and running.  I wasn't prepared for what happened later.

Early that evening I received an e-mail from him. He had read my blog! I was stunned! I'd never dated anyone who read my blog. Most of my family don't know about my blog, and the ones who do have agreed not to read it. The information here is very personal, and I don't feel comfortable having family members read it. I didn't quite know what to think about my date reading it, but I knew it made me feel vulnerable. I was worried.

I was certain my tales of hopelessness would send him running in the opposite direction. After messaging him my concern, he phoned to tell me everything was okay. Not only was he not scared off by my blog, he actually felt it helped him to know me better. He complimented me for surviving this journey I've been traveling. Again, I was stunned. Who was this man?

Since that conversation, we've seen each other again. It went really well. We've been in daily contact. Every time I receive a message from him I smile. I like that. But I'm not jumping in with both feet yet. Online dating can be so temporary. I'm living in the moment. Right now I'm having fun. I look forward to seeing him again, but I'm not planning too far ahead. I like him, and if it's meant to be it will work out as it should. It'll happen one day at a time.