Great benefits come from the small shifts that move us into new directions.--Baron Baptiste

It looks like a gray day is arising here in southern Minnesota. The squirrels are playing in my yard. Fortunately, Puck is sound asleep, otherwise he'd be a little nuts (no pun intended). He's not a fan of squirrels in his yard.

The squirrels are running around looking confused. I found some nuts hidden near the concrete back steps yesterday. The steps are gone now. I crushed them with my handy sledge hammer in preparation for my back patio being built. If you ever want to feel really powerful, take a sledge hammer to some crush-able concrete! I highly recommend it.

I'm up watching SportsCenter, drinking my coffee, preparing for my day. Since beginning the triathlon training program, I haven't been able to sleep much later than 5:00 AM, nor stay awake much later than 8:00 PM. Pretty boring, but it works for me right now.

My triathlon workouts are going well. Yesterday I swam intervals for 2400 yards. That's 96 lengths of the pool. Doesn't that sound impressive? Actually, I was pleasantly surprised, because this same workout was a lot more difficult a few weeks ago. It's always nice when workouts get easier. After crushing my back steps and taking my daily nap, I returned to the gym to complete the strength training portion of my workout. Even the strength training felt easier yesterday.

Today I'll be out (looks like the sun is breaking through the clouds) on my bike for an hour. After hopping off the bike, I'll run for 20 minutes. I tweaked my achilles tendon during the last ten feet of Tuesday's run, so I'm anxious to see how it feels today. I pray it will be okay. Ahhh, who am I kidding? Unless I'm on crutches, nothing will stop me from doing the triathlon at this point. It's only two weeks from today!

Two weeks. I can't wait to see how this all turns out. It's been a long road. But then again, isn't that what makes it all worthwhile? The journey is the destination, right? Baron Baptiste, in his book 40 Days to a Personal Revolution, says, "The inner revolution of growth is about passing through fires. ...there is no shortcut to achieving skill." Amen.