Last week I posed a simple question, "Do you refer to yourself as depressed?" While a few people answered the question, the actual topic discussion continues through today on my site as well as others. I attempted to explain my reasons behind the question in the following two posts. This is one of my "soap box" issues (see here if you'd like a hint at one of my other sudsy talking, er...shouting points). That is, depressed is a feeling. Depression is an illness. For this reason, I never refer to myself as depressed.

Depression is an illness that screws up my brain, but it does not preclude happiness. In other words, I don't have to be depressed (feeling) to experience depression (illness). I can experience happiness and still have depression, just as my neighbor can experience increased energy due to improved blood counts and still have cancer. Cancer is a broad category of illness. There are certain shared characteristics which define an illness as cancer, but it is unlikely that any two cancers are exactly the same in symptomotology or in patient experience. So, too, it is with depression. Depression is a broad category of illness. There is commonality between each of us, but we are not all afflicted with identical symptoms, and our individual experiences may widely vary.

That got me thinking. Perhaps it is time to define depression--the illness. According to the DSM-IV, there are 15 separate diagnosis codes (i.e. diagnoses) for depression, from Depression NOS (not otherwise specified) up to Major Depressive Disorder, Severe, Recurrent with Psychotic Features. To qualify for the depression label a person must either have a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure in daily activities consistently for at least a 2 week period. The mood change cannot be caused by chemical abuse (i.e. alcohol) or a medical condition. And the person's functioning must be impaired as a direct result of the change in their mood. In addition, there are nine specific criteria an MD will look at when diagnosing unipolar depression. I learned a patient will receive the diagnosis of Major Depression if 7 of those 9 criteria are met. Sources on the web simply state "a majority" of the criteria must fit. PsychCentral has a nice summary of depression here, and AllPsych Online succinctly describes depression here.

But then again, you can find those technical descriptions just about everywhere! I think we learn more from listening to each other. I invite you all to share your personal depression definitions here. Leave them as comments, and maybe, with permission, I will post some of them, too. As we get more and more descriptions, we may see how variable this singularly defined experience (depression = depressed) actually is.

I'll include my experience.
Tomorrow.