I don't want to write about not feeling good. It's been so long. But for some reason, or no reason at all, yesterday was a rough day. It was weird. I awoke Thursday morning feeling like I had been hit by a truck. I couldn't seem to shake the sleep from my body. My mood was very low right off the bat.

I had an appointment early in the morning. After returning home, it was my plan to go running. I had a hill workout on my schedule. But when I got home, all I could do was go back to bed. My parents were visiting and just starting their day, but I couldn't even stay awake for them. They went about their business while I slept.

I figured I'd be refreshed and ready to run when I awoke. But two hours later, nothing had changed. The extra sleep didn't help. In fact, I laid back down shortly after I got up. And it wasn't only physical. For the first time in a long time, my mood was in the tank.

I saw my doctor mid-afternoon. At our last visit, we discussed decreasing my anti-depressant. We were going to make a decision at yesterday's appointment, but based upon how I was feeling, we decided against it. Of course that made sense, but I was so looking forward to lowering my dose.

Things continued along the same lines most of the day. I did get out with my mom for a couple hours late in the afternoon, but I never did get those hills run. We ate dinner out, and I couldn't wait to get home. I went to bed long before they retired. Fortunately, my parents understand my occasional need for lots of sleep.

Today has been slightly better. I'm still lower than I've been, but I'm not pushing the panic button yet. I did okay at work today, even though I wasn't my usual chatty, cheerful self. I'm scheduled to run 20 miles tomorrow, and with the cooperation of our current gorgeous, sunny, dry weather, I'm feeling fairly optimistic I'll get it done. I'm preparing now, and I plan for another early bed time tonight.

I'm feeling more hopeful this precipitous descent will reverse itself as quickly as it attacked. And that's what it felt like, a sneak attack. It came out of the blue on what should have been a beautiful, happy day. Thankfully, that was yesterday, and I don't have to live it again. Moving forward now, we'll see what tomorrow brings.