In my experience, depression has been a constantly changing foe. Unlike today, where fatigue is my constant companion, I do not recall this physical heaviness earlier in my journey. Whereas I used to stay awake with racing thoughts, now I require one, sometimes two naps plus my full complement of nightly sleep just to stay upright. Early in this journey, the depth of my despair was more constant and severe. I could not cry. Not a tear...for years, not a tear... It sounds cliched, but I experienced the reality, and the depth of that suffering was excruciating. My tears flow now, and my mood is generally less desperate, but also less stable. Overall, I'm pretty stable (forgive me, now I must run around my house knocking on every wood surface I can find!), but what's changed is how quickly my mood can change. Lightning fast...over the course of a few hours sunshine can turn to covers-over-my-head paralysis. Fortunately, I've been at this awhile, and my coping skills have improved with the years. I no longer feel the need to explain or figure out every dip and dive. "It's part of my illness," is good enough and waiting it out has gotten a bit easier. But, I've also developed some new symptoms over the past 1-2 years. When my symptoms are bad, I sometimes think my radio is playing in the other room or that someone is watching my house. How fun! A little paranoia to keep me on my toes! And my memory absolutely sucks! Cognitive function is what I feel I have lost the most. And again, as my symptoms worsen so too does my memory, concentration and distractability. I've gone from a woman who used to carry half the phonebook in her head to a woman who can't carry on a conversation because she has nothing to talk about. Even if I saw a movie last week, I couldn't tell you about it today. I love World War II history and have probably seen every movie/documentary about the Holocaust that has ever been produced, but don't expect That I can intelligently discuss it with you. I can't. I know I am fascinated and interested in it, but I can't tell you why! I can't talk about the battles, the dates, the political leaders. It just won't stay in my brain, and that's been as a direct result of this illness and my treatment for it. Instead, I battled with irritability, poor judgement, irrational decision making, and a brain that often wouldn't shut off. The more constant fatigue and increased need for sleep began midway through this trip. In fact, it has been my most constant, stable symptom over the past several years. Tired. Just tired. However, my mood was also so low many years ago that I could not even cry. It sounds so cliched, but it was and still can be an incredible depth to experience. No tears, ever, for a long, long time. Depression now causes me a lot of cognitive challenges