Dear Readers,
            Welcome! Thanks for stopping by to read my blog. If you are reading this there is a good chance it is because you or someone you know struggles with depression, anxiety, self-harm, are/have been suicidal, or you are family wondering what I am posting online. Either way thank you for stopping by. I am very excited to be starting "Depression" & Other Bad Words or DepressionOBW for short. It is a project very close to my heart and also very, VERY, personal. It has taken a huge amount of courage to be willing to open up about my own struggles, especially to the public. But I wholeheartedly believe that if this saves one life, touches just one heart, makes a single person feel any less alone than I made the right choice in doing this.
 I have been searching a long time for a topic I was truly passionate about. Something I could pour my very heart in to. I wanted to find the perfect thing to write about. But every time I would sit down and put my pen to paper or my fingers to the keys, NADA! I became quite frustrated with my rather nasty case of writers block. I couldn’t even find the words to put down in my personal journal. This, frankly, bothered me the most! So much had been happening in my life, most of which was not great. Writing had, for the longest time, been my way of working through the hostile territory of my emotions. It was how I dealt with my struggles and pain. But then one day no words came out. I started to feel emotionally backed up. Things got overwhelming. I disappeared in to the darkness of my own mind.
Even as life improved, my writing did not. I still stared blankly at the page that stared blankly back at me. Finally I threw my hands up one night and told God, “Okay, I quit, clearly You don’t want me writing what I feel like writing about.” And then, just like that I had a realization. It wasn’t about what I WANTED to write, it was about what I NEEDED to write. So I dug deep. What hurt the most? What shaped me? What trials had I survived? What could I write that would actually help others? What was God calling me to write about? Turns out I didn’t have to look too deep, in fact the answer was carved right there on the surface of my skin. And with that single glance down at my scars I knew exactly want I needed to write about.
So welcome to “Depression” & Other Bad Words. This is my story and the story of many others that quietly struggle with the same issues. We are going to talk about deeply personal and often uncomfortable topics. Such as self-harm, depression, anxiety, & suicide. I'm going to talk about my story, share interviews with others, and reviews of these topics in the media. I will also be sharing my photography, art, and projects that relate to these "bad words". They are serious problems that many people face in silence because who wants to talk about something so dark or depressing? Guess what, I do! And when asking if anyone was willing to come forward and share their experiences on the topics I was pleasantly surprised at the response. From those who have made it out the other side, family of those who did not, and even those still struggling. There are people who want to speak up for the broken and hurting. The goal here is to inform and most importantly support. I hope this serves as a reminder that you are never truly alone in your pain and struggles.
~Samantha Lou