Five thousand, three hundred, seventeen dollars and twenty cents. That's how much The Social Security Administration wants from me within the next 30 days. Much to my surprise, the letter demanding repayment arrived a few days ago. Here's what's going on.

When I was hospitalized last spring and couldn't return to work, I temporarily went back on Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI). After a couple of months, I returned to work in June, 2011. I called The Social Security Administration and told them I was back working, therefore my SSDI payments should stop. They didn't stop. Approximately one month after I called, my social worker called to tell them I was back at work, and when the payments continued, she later called again. It didn't matter. Unfortunately, SSDI continued paying me until October, 2011.

Knowing I was not deserving of these funds, I attempted to save as much of them as I could. But I couldn't save it all. I missed more work, without pay, after my knee surgery. And then I missed another 4.5 weeks of work, without pay, when I was most recently hospitalized for treatment of my depression. I didn't go out and buy anything fun. I didn't spend a penny on self-gratification. The money went where it was supposed to go. It went to living expenses, bills, groceries, etc...

Here's the rest of the story. I originally received a letter requesting repayment in early December (I think). I appealed, as was my right, by detailing the financial hardship I would endure if I payed them $5,317.20 in one lump sum. I was hoping to at least negotiate a payment plan. As of last week, I hadn't heard one word regarding that appeal. Nothing. And then I got this letter demanding immediate repayment.

The current letter begins by saying, "You were notified that we had scheduled a personal conference for you on January 25, 2012, to discuss the denial of your waiver request, but you did not come in for the personal conference or ask us to reschedule it. Therefore, there is no basis for changing the decision to deny you waiver request. You should refund the $5,317.20 overpayment within 30 days." The letter goes on to say I have no further appeal rights because I missed this personal conference. So much for working out a payment plan...

I was stunned by this letter. Not only had I never been notified of a "personal conference," I was never notified they had denied my appeal! I hadn't heard one word from The Social Security Administration until I received the overpayment demand just a few days ago.

I was, and still am, absolutely distressed by this. I'm not in a position right now to pay them $5,317.20 in one lump sum, but that apparently doesn't matter. I'm frustrated and scared. I did my best to follow the rules. I took the steps I was supposed to take, but it was all for naught. Worse, the letter's tone is scolding and demanding. It makes it sound like I stole the money and then ignored multiple attempts to recover it. Nothing could be further from the truth. It was The Social Security Administration's mistake which put me in this position, and now I'm being treated like a criminal.

I'm now in a stressful, defensive position. In the next few days, I will have to call Social Security, hope to talk with a real person, explain the entire situation, and hope someone will actually care. This is a nightmare. I don't do well with financial stress, and this is about as stressful as it gets.