I saw you today, and Marissa you were looking fine! Stretching out those quads along the path prior to your run, it was nice of you to wave and say hi. I saw you today, PJ or Graybeard or whatever it is you are calling yourself today. I've seen you out a lot over the past few weeks! I figured you were a visitor. I heard the twang in your voice when you asked, "Which one is the Mayo Building?" Hope you're enjoying our smog-free, humidity-free bike paths. Keep walking like that, and you'll need to trade those 34's for a pair of 30's! I saw you today, beartwinsmom, playing with those boys. Must have been a school function, huh? There were a lot of kids out in that park! Looked like you were enjoying the moment, though! I envy you. Didn't I see you at a soccer game the other night, too? I saw you today, Shiv. I'm always a little leery of a bunch of young dudes hanging together, but then you waved hello. Thanks. What were you doing? Just soaking up some sun? It was a beautiful day to be outside. Hope you enjoyed it! I saw you today, BPD. Good for you for getting out and moving around. I know that isn't always easy, so I really felt glad to see you across the road. Keep it up! I saw you today, untreatable. You probably missed me, as you were coming out of the busy government center at the time. I hope you didn't have to spend too much time inside today. Maybe you were just getting your license renewed? We'll have to have lunch when you've got the time. I saw you today.
...and you, and you, and you...


I realized on my run today that I do see you guys all over the place. Since I only know you through cyberspace, I can create your live avatar in whatever physical form embodies your attributes--the attributes I associate with you. Something about the way that woman looked and waved hello today made me think of Marissa! Heck, it could have been Marissa! So, to me, *poof* I just ran past Marissa. Once I realized what I had been unconsciously doing (for days!) it actually got quite fun! From now on I'll be looking for all of you when I am out! Neat.