The owner of the facility in which I work really threw me a curve today. He asked, more like demanded, that I change my schedule. You're probably thinking, "No big deal," but it is to me. I was hired to work Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Since working my way off disability several years ago, this is the schedule I have worked. And there is a reason for it. Working two days in a row wipes me out. I know, I know, that sounds silly. How can someone who runs marathons get wiped out just working back to back days? I don't know exactly, but that's the way it's been since I returned to work while living with this illness.

Prior to depression, I worked full-time. In fact, I worked 10 hour days! I'd like to work more these days as well. But every time I try, and every time I work back to back days, I get wiped out. When I'm wiped out, it takes another day to recover, which means my running suffers as well. And I think I've recently demonstrated how important running is to maintaining my mood. So ultimately, working two days in a row, on a regular basis, has not proved to be good for my mental health.

Doing anything that risks my mental health scares me to death, and that's why I told the owner, "No." No I would not trade my Wednesday for a Tuesday or Thursday, as he wished. In fact, when he insisted, I told him, if that was the case, I would have to leave. He backed off a bit, but not before laying a huge guilt trip on me. He demanded to know why I wouldn't switch. I told him, in a very politically correct manner, it was none of his business. It was a very tense conversation.

The reality is my life is arranged around my Monday, Wednesday, Friday schedule. Not only does it keep me from working back to back days, it is my way of life, and it has been for years. Most significantly, my running schedule is arranged around my work schedule. My doctor appointments, therapist appointments and every other regularly scheduled appointment I have is arranged around it. It's familiar, and it works.

I realize all of these things are changeable. I'm wondering now if I'm being too rigid. Why can't I just do as he asked...uh, demanded. Maybe it would be okay. And maybe it wouldn't. I don't know. I guess his guilt trip is working a bit. But I'm also now actively looking for a new place to work.