Talk about TRUE SPORTSMANSHIP, the POWER of WOMEN, PAYING IT FORWARD, and UNBELIEVABLE CHARACTER!

A few days ago, senior Sara Tucholsky and her Western Oregon University softball team were battling conference foe Central Washington when Sara did something she had never, ever done in her entire career. She hit a home-run--a THREE run home-run!

Perhaps due to the excitement of the moment, Sara missed first base. Unfortunately, as she turned back to tag the bag, she collapsed in pain. Sara had torn up her knee, and though she was able to crawl back to first, she could not continue around the bases. Suddenly, her moment of glory crashed into a painful conundrum for her, her coach, and her team. You see, the rules do not allow a player to be assisted around the bases by teammates, and if her coach had inserted a pinch-runner, the runner would have only been allowed to take over at Sara's current position, first base. Sara's home-run would have been wiped from the books and replaced with a single.

Then, in a moment that should go down in sports lore, Central Washington first baseman Mallory Holtman, the career home run leader in the Great Northwest Athletic Conference, asked the umpire if she and her teammates could help Tucholsky. The umpire could not think of any reason or rule against it, and as shocked spectators' eyes filled with tears, Sara's opponents carried her around the bases. They briefly stopped at each base to allow Sara to tag the bag with her good leg and thereby officially record her home run.

The three run homer led Sara's team to a 4-2 victory and knocked Mallory and her Central Washington teammates out of the playoffs. Yet, there were apparently no regrets. "We didn't know that she was a senior, or that this was her first home run," said Liz Wallace, the shortstop who helped Mallory Holtman carry Sara around the base paths. "That makes the story more touching than it was. We just wanted to help her." Holtman said she and Wallace weren't thinking about the playoff spot and didn't consider the gesture something others wouldn't do.

Are you kidding me? I have never seen this in men's sports--sorry guys--and I think Holtman is being quite generous in thinking other athletes, men or women, would replicate this gesture in similar situations. I hope she is right. I think that comment further demonstrates that she is a truly humble and amazing woman. She should be proud. The Central Washington team should be proud. Their coach should be proud. And female athletes everywhere should be beaming! I know I am! What a great story!! Way to go Central Washington Women's Softball Team!