I received my four year medallion at my home AA meeting this morning. Getting my medallion is always a great moment to reflect on what's happened over the past year. When I accepted my medallion, I mentioned Ben, the young man I mentored for two years and who graduated this past June; the support of my friends and sponsors, the lessons I've learned from sponsees, and this blog. Without sobriety, I noted, I wouldn't have been able to mentor anyone, I wouldn't have had close friends, sponsors or sponsees with whom to share my life, and I certainly wouldn't have been able to maintain this blog.

Afterward, it was this blog that seemed to create the most buzz within the room. When I brought it up, I noted that my blog was about mental illness--specifically depression--and that like many, I am an alcoholic who also has mental illness.

If you've been following along, you know I've written about mental illness and addiction before. Unfortunately, too often I was prompted to write after an AA'er made an irresponsible or negative comment about mental illness. Here are a few of my favorite examples: "Well if you just worked the steps better, you wouldn't have depression," or "All psychiatrists are idiots," or "If you're in recovery, you shouldn't take any anti-depressants." Thankfully, I didn't hear anything remotely resembling any of those comments today! In fact, something very strange happened. People started respectfully discussing mental illness among alcoholics!

To say I was pleasantly surprised by this development is an understatement! I was shocked. At least 10 people asked me for my blog address. Another 5 or 6 members confided that they, too, had a mental illness and/or took medication, and they thanked me for bringing it up. But perhaps most remarkable was when one of our long-term, male members (who gave me permission to write this) spoke directly about his own recent struggles. It seems he's been having some anxiety, suicidal thoughts, and general mental discomfort of late. He talked about calling his doctor, taking meds, and his plan to see a therapist for the first time in his life. After the meeting, he appeared to receive nothing but support from many of the men and women in the room.

I was honored and impressed with my AA group today. It wasn't that long ago when I felt the sting of stigma within this crowd. One member told me to stop talking about my depression, as it had nothing to do with recovery, she said. Imagine that member telling a cancer sufferer that her cancer was not relevant to her recovery! Today things were different. Rather than stigma, I experienced respect and support. I felt hope. Perhaps by not being silent the door today was opened. Perhaps by ignoring the ignorance, others felt comfortable not only to share but to support.

It was a big day, a dramatic day, for this mentally ill recovering alcoholic. I hope my AA group will continue to honor all struggles among our diverse lot. The door, it seems, is now ajar. Be open and honest about your struggles, my friends, you just never know what may happen. Perhaps you, too, will experience a great moment where support triumphs over stigma.