I thought summer would never arrive, and I'm welcoming the warm weather and sunshine with open arms. I ran 8 miles in the middle of the day today and just soaked it all in. I was sweating up a storm but enjoyed every minute.

I spent this past weekend with D. He came to visit from Milwaukee. We ran together, spent a day with my brother, had a nice dinner out, and had brunch with my best friend, Wendy. D hasn't met any of my brothers, so it was nice for him to meet at least one of them. They seemed to enjoy each other. We spent the day walking around, eating, and shopping in my brother's historic small town. The weather was gorgeous. My brother was funny, as usual. And we had a really fine day.

Wendy also had not met D. She's been teasing me, saying he's just a figment of my imagination. Well they finally got to meet when we had brunch together on Sunday. We had a great time and laughed a lot. Wendy gave D her seal of approval afterward. It's always good when your friends like your boyfriend. It was a very nice weekend.

D left Sunday afternoon, and as usual I was exhausted. I think I slept for two hours after he left. I love when he's here, but I always feel tired after he's gone. I think it's just the result of being out of my routine. I'm busier than when I'm alone on the weekends, and I don't get to nap.

I don't think I've yet recovered from the weekend because my parents arrived yesterday right after work. They spent the night and left this morning. So again, no nap yesterday. I worked 6 hours, went for my run, and then spent the evening with my parents. They helped me pick out a new lawn mower, and we went out to eat. By the time we got home, put the lawn mower together and tested it out, it was time for bed.

Thankfully, I didn't work today. I napped after my parents left, ran, and mowed my lawn. I got back into my routine, but I am still tired! I'll be back at work for another 6 hours tomorrow. It's frustrating to be so tired. I feel like I should be able to handle the slight uptick in activity without so much fatigue, but apparently I can't. And I guess there is no use to be frustrated by it. It is what it is. I'll hopefully sleep well tonight and catch up. I'm looking forward to that.