Only three days left until the big event. My triathlon starts at 7 AM Sunday morning. I start right at 7:00 in the first of three waves. As usual during a taper week, I'm freaking out because I feel heavy. The fact that it is my last week of work, I'm about to start a new job, I'm squeezing in extra obligations, and my triathlon suit's zipper keeps breaking may have something to do with the freaking out as well! I don't know. What do you think?

Finishing at my current job has been bitter-sweet. Upper management has barely lifted a finger to replace me, and my co-workers expect to be swamped. That makes me feel a little guilty. I'll miss working with my co-workers, especially my assistant. She's pretty damn good. We work cooperatively and have fun together. I'll miss that. I won't miss the lazy, unfriendly nursing home staff, however. Good riddance! And I certainly won't miss the drive. Like I said, leaving has been a bitter-sweet process.

I haven't had too much time to be anxious about my new job yet. I'm spending too much energy worrying about the triathlon. I've been running around trying to fit in extra obligations, which are required of me before I can start the new job. For example, today I have to spend four hours getting my CPR re-certification. I'm hoping we don't take the whole four hours. That's half my day! I've got other things to do!

I've got to work out, go to the dentist, hit the track club board meeting, and exercise Puck. I'm hoping to get my workout done early this morning before CPR. I'm scheduled to swim for 60 minutes. Seems like a lot of swimming so close to the triathlon, but I probably need to burn a few extra calories so I'll do it. After swimming for that long, I may actually be able to focus on CPR. As soon as I finish CPR, I'll be off to the dentist. I have another fractured tooth (too much popcorn!) which we will try to save with a filling. I'm losing my dental insurance with this new job, so I'm trying to get my dental work done now! I pray I won't need another root canal! Perhaps I should seriously consider giving up popcorn. This evening I have the track club board meeting, but I may not make it this month. We'll see how the rest of the day goes. Puck will need my attention, too.

As we say in Minnesota, "Uff Dah!" I've got a busy day ahead! I'll have to say a little prayer, take it one moment at a time, and just work my way through it. Life is moving forward. I'll try to set my fears and worry aside and hang on for the ride! "Wheeeeee..." Have a great day!