     As it seems to be rapidly growing in popularity I figured what better pop culture issue of depression and suicide to cover first. So I am going to be reviewing 'Netflix Original- 13 Reasons Why'. It was released on March 31st of this year, making it about 2 ½ months old as a hit show. I know I am a bit late to the game with this. And if you would like my honest reason why, it is because I was still recovering from my own suicide attempt from only 6 month earlier. I wanted to be in a healthier place before even considering watching something so closely relating to my own struggles. In fact when it popped up on my Netflix and I first read what it was about I had decided not to watch it EVER! Why bring in fictional darkness and pain when I am dealing with enough of my own. 
     Since then I have found a much healthier place. I work daily, hourly even, to keep myself in that place. I figured now I can watch ‘13 Reasons Why’ objectively. Not unlike I did a few years ago with 10 movies that portrayed schizophrenia for my Psychology term paper on schizophrenia in the media. To objectively study the way the media and ‘pop culture’ go about displaying mental illness fascinates me. To be doing this review of the show in that aspect excites me. However due to the nature of '13 Reasons Why' I am proceeding with caution for my own state of mind. For this reason I do not have a timeline, if I am in a good place to watch one I will. If I think I need to not, then I won’t. Same goes for the number of episodes I review in each post. Sometimes it may be on a single episode, other times it may cover 2 or 3.
     I want to start, before even reviewing the first episode to talk about all the publicity and hype surrounding '13 Reasons Why'. When I Googled “Netflix 13 Reasons Why” this is the first thing to come up.


     Top stories, all about real world copycat suicides that may have been inspired by the show. I feel like that would be considered bad press. Not to mention be very concerning to someone who is thinking about watching the show. Yet when you look at the show’s ratings it has an 8.6/10 on IMDb, 86% on Rotten Tomatoes, 92% on Google, even Common Sense Media gave it 4/5. I has been one of the most twitted about shows in 2017 according to Variety. And is generally regarded as one of Netflix most popular shows on social media. Even I still see at least one post on Facebook a day about '13 Reasons Why'.
     I even took the time to skim through the 1203 Member Reviews on Netflix about the show. There seems to be one of two opinions.

★★★★★
"Best show ever"
"Everyone should watch it" 
"So touching and emotional"
"Every teen needs to see this" 
"Great conversation starter on hard topics like suicide"

 Or

★☆☆☆☆
"DO NOT WATCH"
"Trigger Warning"
"Worst show ever"
 "Do NOT let your teen watch"
 "Promotes and glamorizes suicide"

     These are two pretty extreme opinions on very opposite sides of the spectrum. I know people on both ends too. Someone dear to me, who is depressive and was committed for a suicide attempt only a month ago, LOVES the show. Yet I have another friend who struggles just like him who is HORRIFIED by the show. Same goes for the opinions of those that do not struggle with depression and being suicidal. There are parties in both camps staying it’s the greatest thing since sliced bread or that it is harmful. It really makes me curious. 

What is so great about it that even someone that knows the real pain loves it? 

What is so bad about it than those who will never fully understand even fear the message it sends?

     Answers I will not have till I have watched the whole show... So now on to the trailers! Why? Because the trailers are often times what draw us in to a show. The hook, the thing that gets us excited for a new release. So let’s take a look at the trails and see what is so attention grabbing about them. As well as what impression they give in their few minutes. What feeling do they give to a show that we (or at least I) have not watched yet?

13 Reasons Why: Season 1 Trailer
     My general impression from this trailer was that '13 Reasons Why' is going to be a murder(suicide) mystery involving revenge on those responsible from the spirit of the dead girl. I’m not sure how others took it but here is why I got that impression.
     The text was a key factor in shaping my opinion and expectation of the show. It was minimal, starting with the line “Bases on a bestselling mystery”, so it must be a mystery. Then there was “They’re afraid of the truth” and “They should be”. This struck me as a threat of revenge against the people responsible for the death. And is she a ghost? Because there is a scene where she says “Why didn’t you say this to me when I was alive?” I would also like to point out the song in the background, “this is the wild game of survival”, it makes the whole trailer feel like it is a big game of death and revenge. A thriller mystery who-done-it kind of deal. So I will be interested in seeing how the actual show reflects on the idea the trailer has left me with.
     The secondary trailers; 'Beyond Just Us' and 'Trying to Understand' are simpler. A few clips from the show, nothing to telling though. However unlike the main trailer they both seem to have a similar theme and feel of blame. One is of Clay, presumably the main character, blaming the school and its students for Hannah’s suicide. The other is Hannah’s mom blaming the school and students for Hannah’s death. I have some concerns with this concept of blaming others for someone’s choice to end their life. As I have only watched these three trailers so far I am unsure of how heavily this theme of blame will be in the show itself. 

     That is all for today! Keep an eye out for Review: 13 Reasons Why, Episode 1

~Samantha Lou