This is my time of year. Warm days followed by crisp nights, as was the case today, are my kind of days. I love the musty smell of leaves in the air. I love the sound of dry leaves crunching under foot, especially when I'm walking with Puck, and we're kicking up the fall debris together. We just came in from our walk, in fact. The sun set before we turned for home, and we enjoyed Fall's heightened sounds and smells as dusk settled in. It was a lovely end to a very nice day.

I'm still feeling well. I think I usually feel well at this time of year. I don't recall any depression relapses of any significance which have occurred in the Fall. Winter and Spring seem to be more precarious. It's nice to feel good. It's nice to enjoy life.

I'm getting back into my training. I ran 16 miles in the rain Saturday morning, and tomorrow I'm back on the track for eight, 1/2 mile repeats at seven minute pace. Based on how tired my legs were during Saturday's long run, I think I'm in for a pretty tough workout tomorrow morning. But at the same time, I'm looking forward to getting back on the track. What can I say? I like to push myself, and I always feel great after a hard speed workout!

Speaking of feeling great, this weekend brings big news. My friend, D, is coming to visit. It will be our first weekend together since we stopped dating in January. Well, we didn't really stop dating. He disappeared when I was in the hospital getting treated for depression. Anyway, this is a big step in our relationship. I'm nervous and excited.

D still hasn't assured me he won't disappear again if I have another relapse. Depression is so foreign to him. It really scares him. But I think we're moving in the right direction. We've certainly spent a fair amount of time discussing the issue, which I really appreciate. If he's willing to be educated, I'm willing to do the teaching. The fact is I care about him. I'm hoping we can develop a strong relationship, but even if that doesn't happen, none of this time together will be wasted. I'm enjoying the experience. One day at a time, my friends. One day at a time.