I am selling my car. Why? Because I bought a new one! This is a big deal. I've had my current car for 12+ years. I bought it brand new, and I've been the sole driver ever since. It's a 1998 Saturn SC2, and I just took it past 200,000 miles. I put a very fair price on it, and people have been coming out of the woodwork. In fact, I sold it today, but then I realized I needed it for a few more days, as I won't have my new one until Tuesday! DAH! Unfortunately, when I told the young man (buyer) this news, the deal no longer worked for him. I have at least three people coming to look at it tomorrow. I expect it will sell.

I'm going to be sad to see it go. This car has been through quite a journey with me, and it's treated me very kindly. It's funny how a person can get attached to something like a car. I actually want it to go to a "good" home--somebody who will take care of it. Isn't that a bit silly?

Anyway, I bought a 2006 Toyota Highlander with 59,000 miles on it. It's gorgeous, loaded, and big enough to carry my bike and my dog at the same time! Unfortunately, in order to keep my payment as low as possible, I'm also selling my motorcycle. My 1985 Honda Shadow has also been kind to me. I'll miss it, but I just don't ride it enough to make it worthwhile. I'd rather spend my time and money on my bicycle, I guess.

So I've been busy around here. I had to clean up my car and motorcycle so they'd shine. That was a bit of work for my very dirty car. I've also been cleaning out my house, as I plan to have a large garage sale in a couple weeks. I've got so much stuff that I never use, or that doesn't fit me anymore, or that I just no longer want, it's ridiculous! I'm feeling weighted down by excess stuff. I want to get rid of it all! Preparing for the sale, however, is also going to be a lot of work.

Speaking of work, things are quite busy there now, too. I worked 12.5 hours on Wednesday. I've got two patients in a town one hour and ten minutes away now. By the time I drive there, treat both of them, and drive back, half of my day is gone. But I don't mind one bit. And soon,I'll be driving that 1:10 in my new vehicle! Hee, hee...

Life's busy. I'm busy. Things are going well. I'm not doing a lot of exercising, but right now I'm okay. Following the Weight Watchers plan helps me feel less panicky about not training. I do hope things settle just a bit, however, because I'd like to get back on my bike. Well, I better get back to it. That laundry won't fold itself! Take care everyone!