I attended what I presume to be the mini-version of this workshop at the RISE Conference a few months ago. It was definitely enlightening. I can't compare it to the other very popular anti-racism workshop (Undoing Racism) because I haven't taken it, but the men who orchestrated this workshop were excellent teachers. I look forward to it, and I love supporting RISE with everything they do if I can.

Here's some info:

Kick off the New Year with some anti-racist practice with the RISE community!

RISE EVENT:
Racial Microaggressions: Real Pain, Invisible Scars
Saturday, January 29, 2011
9am-4pm
Downtown Brooklyn
Register for location details!

Learn about racial microaggressions. Discuss how they impact you and your work. Practice confronting them. Build your community of radical allies.

After the success of the Racial Microaggressions workshop at the 2010 RISE conference, we are back with an extended version! This day-long workshop will:
* Explore how people of color experience and white people perpetuate racial microaggressions in personal and professional settings
* Address how people and communities of color have been conditioned to engage in racial microaggressions toward one another
* Examine the role of media, language, and societal/institutional norms in encouraging racial microaggressions
* Practice tools for interrupting racial microaggressions when they happen
When: Saturday, January 29, 2011.
Where: Long Island University, Downtown Brooklyn Campus. (More location details to come!)
Time: 9:00 am- 4:00 pm
Cost: No Cost- $15. Please pay at the level you can afford. All of our funds go entirely into operating expenses. Lunch will be provided.
Check out the details on our website or register online now! Space is very limited. Sliding scale based on ability to pay: $0-$15
This will be an experiential workshop for people with a foundational understanding of systemic/institutional racism. In order to have a rich conversation we are committed to recruiting a racially diverse group of participants. Please check out our workshop guidelines here for more information about the day.


Happy New Year from RISE!

RISE Organizing Committee
Organizing Collective
RISE: Social Work to End Oppression
info@riseconference.org
www.riseconference.org