Ragnarok, motherfuckers!

Thank God the Holidays are almost over. Just need to get through New Year's and then we can put this fucking cocksucker to bed! 2009 SUCKED ASS!

Speaking of life SUCKING ASS, AKA "The Human Condition", no one speaks more eloquently and poetically about life's basic fucked-upedness than E.M. Cioran. Since I'm so goddamned pissed that I'll probably start throwing things and screaming if I have to somehow keep forming coherent sentences, I think I'll let good ol' Cioran speak for me.

Take it away, you cynical Romanian fuck, God of my dreams, poet of my soul!
"To be is to be cornered."
"It is not worth the bother of killing yourself, since you always kill yourself too late."
"My mission is to suffer for all those who suffer without knowing it. I must pay for them, expiate their unconsciousness, their luck to be ignorant of how unhappy they are."
"Nothing makes us modest, not even the sight of a corpse."
"Suffering makes you live time in detail, moment after moment. Which is to say that it exists for you: over the others, the ones who don’t suffer, time flows, so that they don’t live in time, in fact they never have."
"When we have glimpsed, by an overwhelming and readily renewable intuition, anyone’s own uselessness, it is incomprehensible that everyone has not done the same. To do away with oneself seems such a clear and simple action! Why is it so rare, why does everyone avoid it? Because, if reason disavows the appetite for life, the nothing which extends our acts is nonetheless of a power superior to all absolutes; it explains the tacit coalition of mortals against death; it is not only the symbol of existence, but existence itself; it is everything. And this nothing, this everything, cannot give life a meaning, but it nonetheless makes life persevere in what it is: a state of non-suicide."
"A sudden silence in the middle of a conversation suddenly brings us back to essentials: it reveals how dearly we must pay for the invention of speech."
"God: a disease we imagine we are cured of because no one dies of it nowadays."
"If each of us were to confess his most secret desire, the one that inspires all his plans, all his actions, he would say: 'I want to be praised.' "
"If we could see ourselves as others see us, we would vanish on the spot."