{Photo courtesy of here}
Nourish.

“You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it means.”

I purposely used the word “nourishing” in the title of this blog for very specific reasons. It is a word commonly used to describe how the body relates to food. However, it is also a verb used to describe other functions of the human person such as, nourishing the soul, nourishing the mind, etc. When you nourish yourself, you do more than feed it, you improve your quality of life in the process.

You can nourish yourself in many ways; eating real food, praying, receiving the sacraments, engaging in intellectual conversations, reading inspiring books, learning to relate to others, and so on. I think it is important to nourish yourself regularly. "Am I going MAD, or did the word 'think' escape your lips?"

In the past, the word “nourishing” had no place in my life. I treated my body as a machine to be manipulated. You can’t “nourish” a car. Therefore, I could not “nourish”myself because I viewed by body as a thing to be conquered, controlled, driven, pushed to the limit, and used.

At the root of this disordered thinking was my desire to be separated from my body. I didn’t like it and I wanted to change it because it wasn’t good enough for me…bottom line…I wasn’t good enough or, at least, I didn’t feel like I was good enough. I believed that my body was bad and, left to it’s own devices, would run amok and ruin my life...an outcome worse than life in the "Fire Swamp".

A huge turning point for me was the realization that I am not against my body. My body is a very necessary part of me. And I must listen to it, rather than control it. I have to work with my body if I want to achieve God’s unique plan for my life.

During the holidays, we can be more susceptible to negative body image. Seeing people you haven’t seen in a while might lead you to compare yourself to them. Also, you might be tempted to compare yourself to what you were like last year. The environmental changes along with a slew of other triggers can set you off on the wrong path and lead you to the "Pit of Despair".

Look at yourself in the mirror and, instead of picking out a flaw, look at your beauty and praise God for creating you. If you find yourself starting to body bash, stop, and think about why you are doing it. Maybe you are feeling down about something else entirely. Recognizing what that might be will help you deal with the real issue and, hopefully, help you avoid unjustly degrading your body. This will take practice, "You rush a miracle man, you get rotten miracles."

Challenge of the day: Listen to your body. Remember that you and your body are on the same side - you are working together. Praise your body for allowing you to do some pretty amazing things like, giving a hug, reading a book, talking on the phone, watching a movie. Without our bodies, we couldn’t do any of those things! So, say “thank you” to your body!
  Inigo: "You know, Fessik, you finally did something right."
Fessik: "Don't worry, I won't let it go to my head."
{Priness Bride quotes courtesy of here.}