The World Health Organization recently published that, in the last 45 years, suicide rates have increase by 60%.  In the United States alone these rates are higher, and the number of people diagnosed with clinical depression has increased exponentially every year.  Mental disorders, such as depression disorder and alcohol abuse disorder, are the number one cause of suicide deaths in our free country.

In light of those recent statistics, I am going to make a bold statement...

I believe the increased number of major depressive disorder cases and the resulting suicide rates in the U.S. is a consequence of the legalization of abortion.

For over 40 years, abortion has been legal in the United States.

If you have been directly affected by the evil of abortion, then you are very likely to suffer from depression because of the tragedy of the event.  The abortion industry conceals this truth, but it is a horrific experience to have an abortion.

Every medication label, every medical procedure, every box of cigarettes, and even some food labels include a warning about the possible health risks associated with the using the products.  Every doctor will talk about the risks of certain medical surgeries, procedures, and decisions and thoroughly discuss the outcome with the patient.  Every doctor is looking out for the best interest of the patient by giving them this information.  Every single surgery has this routine, except one majorly invasive surgical procedure, abortion.  Women are told that the "problem" can be taken care of in a matter of minutes and they will never have to think of it again.  However, the reality of the situation is that a very high percentage of woman will suffer immense physical complications as a result of the abortion.  And a high majority of mothers will suffer life-long emotional trauma in the form of anxiety, depression, or other mental illnesses in the years following an abortion.  If you have had an abortion, you are 248% more likely die as a result of suicide with the first year!  This information is staggering!  Yet, those horrific statistics are hidden from the public, not to mention hidden from the patients themselves.

I am convinced that the increase in mental illnesses such as major depressive disorder is a result of the legalization of abortion.

The root of the problem is that we have completely disregarded the VALUE of human life.

Even if you have never had an abortion or been directly involved in an abortion, you are still susceptible to the effects of this great tragedy.  Even if you are avidly pro-life, you will still be greatly influenced by the culture of death brought about by abortion, contraception, euthanasia, selective parenting, stem cell research, etc.  EVERYONE is effected by these evils more than they know.

If a culture has no respect for life at its beginning (at conception), what point does life receive value?  Eight weeks?  Eight months?  Eight Years?  If a culture does not condone euthanasia of the elderly, the severely disabled, or ill, when does a person stop becoming worthy of life?  In addition, who decides when someone no longer has value anyway?

As a culture, we have crossed the line.  We are being brainwashed to believe that it is okay to kill another living human being.  Since there is no respect for life at its beginning or at its end, who is to believe that there will be respect for human life in between?  Well, the hard truth is; our society does NOT value human life as it is.

Today we are faced with a very dangerous school of thought.  The public consensus is that a person has value because of what he can do.  Just think of how we desire to climb the ladder of success.  Think of how we value accomplishments and praise achievements.  What do you do and how do you think when you cannot contribute to society?

This ugly cultural reality is evident in many ways.  One manifestation of this belief is the fact that our government has legalized abortion and some forms of euthanasia.  In society’s eyes, the unborn, the severely disabled, and the elderly cannot productively contribute to society.  Reflected in our country's laws, these human persons are useless and, therefore, their lives do not have value.

How does it feel to know that you, as a human being, have value in our current culture based only on what you are capable of doing?  Whether or not you can contribute to society determines whether or not you are worthy of life.

Under the influence of this culture of death, it’s no wonder why so many people commit suicide.

For 40 years, we have been told that we have to earn our value.  Why would abortion be legal if we didn’t think this way?  The culture of death shows us that you are not worthy of life until you can prove that you are valuable.  You, yourself, according to this culture, do not deserve life until you earn it.

Most people suffering from a severe depression feel that they are incapable of doing anything.  A major symptom of depressive disorder is feeling "worthless".  If you have depression, or have ever experience a very low time in your life, it is likely that you felt useless and, maybe, not even deserving of life.

Look around and everything about our society affirms that belief.  How can anyone expect to fully recover when what we are told and what we witness are not in line.  Our actions, on the whole, show what we really think about life.  It doesn’t matter what we say, the actions by our legal government prove that we do not value life as it is, in our country.

Now that you've been shown this relation between abortion and depression, what do you think?

You may not be directly affected by abortion, but it affects you more than you realize.

All human beings are created by God and, therefore, have an immense value.  Each person, from conception until natural death is deserving and worthy of living.

This reality is yet another reason to stand up, speak out, and embrace the culture of LIFE!

    Watch the Trailer for the Movie "Blood Money" here, and then go watch the Movie!