Today I would like to take a break from my normal writing routine to give you a smorgasbord of tasty treats to sink your teeth into.  So pick up your knife, fork, and your reading glasses and get ready!
  I am not the only blogger out there who writes about mental health.  In case you wanted more to read than what I have to offer, look below for some excellent articles.
  Some of these bloggers can be found in my “Weblog Wonders” column if you would like future reference material.  I update the list from time to time as I discover more writers with incredible insight.  I guarantee you will enjoy reading their posts as much as you enjoy reading mine.

I found this article through “The Feeding Doctor” Blog.  In this piece, you will read a really good perspective that goes against the grain when it comes to children and mealtime.  Click here to read this post, titled, “What’s On Your Plate?”

A few weeks ago, I published a short snippet of what I thought “normal” or “healthy” eating meant to me.  I was inspired to write that post after reading this great article by Margarita Tartakovsky of the blog “Weightless”.  Click here to read, “What is Normal Eating?”

Click here to read “When the “healthy eating” message goes very, very wrong”. I know that the “healthism” trend is stemming from good intentions.  We want to take care of ourselves and we want our loved ones to be healthy too.  In this article, Carrie Arnold of ED Bites talks about how the healthy eating message can go too far and actually cause more harm than good.

Have you ever been with a young kid at Wal-Mart or other store and came across people who look different than you?  Do you find it difficult to explain to your kids about body types?  Click here to read “How to talk to kids about obesity”.

I love a good blog about taking care of yourself.  It is not self-centered, greedy, wrong, or morally sinful to take care of yourself.  I am putting this one out there especially for the young mothers who have a lot on their plate and often sacrifice time for themselves when things get crazy.

“There’s a social medicine study that shows that positive emotions are literally contagious. When one person in a circle of friends becomes healthier & happier, it creates a measurable ripple effect, extending through her friends, family and colleagues. The study confirms what we all (secretly) know to be true: When you take care of yourself & take responsibility for your happiness, everyone benefits.”

Click here to read the whole article.

I hope you enjoyed the reading feast.  Have a nourishing weekend!