...if you knew you wouldn’t fail?

Fear of failure holds us back from doing many things throughout the duration of our lives.  If the feeling of fear was not attached to failure, would our actions look different?

What would you do if you knew, for a fact, and believed it with your whole heart, that you wouldn’t fail?

How would your life look?

Take a few moments and look deep into your soul.  Realize those things that you would love to do but are too afraid to make the first move.  Write down a few things that come to mind.  Are you doing these things already or are you too afraid to fulfill your desires?  This exercise will show you, whether or not, you are running your life, or fear is running your life.

My list below is what I would do if I knew, for certain, that I would succeed:

I would have a portrait business and sell hand drawn or hand painted portraits.
I would teach summer art classes out of my garage to kids of all ages.
I would paint murals for other people's homes.

After reflecting a great deal on my fearless goals, as you can see, I came to the conclusion that I want art in my life.  This makes complete sense to me because I have always been an artist at heart.  I have loved every facet of the fine arts since I was very young.  I’ve wanted to be an artist my whole life.

But because I am also a perfectionist, unfortunately, the fear of failure is holding me back from doing what I truly love to do.

I know when I made my first decision out of fear.  It happened when I decided to go to college to study Math instead of going to a school to studying Art.  I was afraid of being dependant on someone else.  I was afraid of not being able to support myself.  I was told that I would have a tumultuous future had I went into the art field.  So I choose the route of becoming a Math Teacher instead.  I barely lasted two years as a math major.

I am not blaming anyone else for my decisions.  I was young and naïve.  And that’s okay.  Everything that has happened in the past has made me who I am today.  I have few regrets.

But will I learn from my mistakes?  With the knowledge I have gained, I am going to try and take baby steps to move toward my goals.

This task will be extremely difficult.  I am in the terrible habit of letting fear rule my life.  It is going to take a long time to break that habit, so I must be patient with myself.

It may even take a lifetime, but it will be worth it.

What would you do if you knew you wouldn’t fail?