Hmmmm....just start writing. That's the trick, they say, to achieving consistent, habitual output for the writer. Practice makes perfect, or at least, practice makes us satisfied with our efforts. If I put in the work, then I know I've tried as hard as I can and the rest is up to God. What I put out there doesn't have to make sense, just start typing and typing and typing for a few minutes to get warmed up...just keep typing. It's like stretching for the runner, because you have to get warmed up before you take off or you'll get injured.

I think this method would be a good experiment to try for painting as well. But painting is tricky business. There is paint involved! There is set up beforehand and clean up afterward, and I just don't have that kind of time right now. But I keep coming back to it....like the urge to eat. I get hungry everyday, don't you? I get hungry like 3 or 4 or 5 times a day......and I usually eat, regardless of the hassle, don't you?

I could set up some space in a room that would be a safe place to paint, drop cloths down or a "who care's about that floor" floor, supplies at hand, classical music ready to go, a lock on the door to keep out dangerously curious hands, etc. I could come and go easily. Situations with the kids change from minute to minute, and I'm often caught in a whirlwind of hundred things to do in about five minutes of time.

Nice. I like this exercise. It's reminiscent of High School Spanish class when our teacher would set the egg timer for a minute and we had to write exclusively in Spanish the whole time. Boy oh boy did we grumble! But, gosh darn it if we didn't get better and better if we just tried and trusted in the pen.

It is so hard to show our vulnerable side...our unedited side. We really like to Photoshop before posting and edit before publishing.

We're fighting a losing battle tying to be absolutely perfect.

Every sunrise is different, every sunrise is beautiful. The sun is not trying to create the perfect sunrise....the sun is just fulfilling it's potential as it was created. It is just, moment to moment, being what it was created to be, nothing more.