My doctor and I decided that it was time to start tapering off of my prescription anti-depressant drugs.  In the beginning, I thought I would have to take the pills forever.  But in most cases, people struggling with depression only have to take the meds for a year or two.  Click here to read my myth busting post about anti-depressants.

Since I began taking the anti-depressants, I have stopped a lot of bad habits and developed good habits (healthy coping skills) to deal with my anxiety and depression.  I am ready to see if I can stay that way without the drugs.

I am still going to monitor my symptoms and take care of myself by going to counseling, eating nourishing foods, exercising to enhance my life, and other self-help practices.  I don’t want to make the same mistakes and end up in the hospital again.

My new treatment plan includes:
Eat regular meals
Eat nourishing foods that I like and that make me feel good
Moderate exercise 3 days a week for 20 minutes if I can
Frequent activities and hobbies that I enjoy (and things that give me a sense of purpose)
Try to get eight hours of sleep a night
Limited caffeine
Limited stressful activities and commitments
Absolutely NO alcohol
  These changes are not major for me.  I am already doing everything I listed above, and I have been for some time now.  All those things are ways that I take better care of myself.  From experience, I know that those things help me feel better and keep the depression symptoms from coming back. 

The only major change coming up is that I am not popping the little green and off-white pill at eight o’clock every morning any more.

Without the medication, I don’t think that I could have made all those healthy changes.  But now it is time to see if I can still take care of myself while I am off the drugs.  Should I not be able to function without the drugs and my symptoms return, then I will have to get back on the meds.  And that is OK.  I am going to rely on the things I have learned, my husband, my support system, and my counselor to help me monitor my progress and determine whether or not I am on the right path.  If my symptoms return, then I will cross that bridge when it’s time. 

How I was taking care of myself several years ago:
Eating sporadically or only when I “had” to (meaning to keep myself from passing out)
Eating low-calorie, fat-free foods only
Excessive work-outs for 2-3 hours a day
Abuse of diuretics
Long hours at a high-stress job
Sacrificing sleep so I could exercise before work
5-6 cups of coffee a day

I don’t want to go back to the way I was.  Should any of these bad habits return, I am going to see my doctor again.  I know that those unhealthy habits will only lead me to depression, despair, and suicidal tendencies.

All things considered, I am optimistic.  I think everything will turn out fine.  I know that I am the same person now and I’ll be the same person when I am off the meds.

However, I am also not naïve.  It is not all of a sudden going to be hearts, stars, and butterflies.  I know that there will still be times of stress, suffering, and bad days.  And that is OK.

So, if you notice my writing starting to take a downhill plunge, don’t be afraid to speak up.  Just kidding.  Most likely, if I start to relapse, I will stop writing altogether.

When I came home from the hospital last summer, I was advised to put together some information for easy access.  Because I always go above and beyond, I created a pamphlet that anyone in the Tri-county area could use for a format.  Click here to take a look.

I advise anyone struggling with depression and anxiety to make a similar document.  Feel free to copy my format, if you like.  I had mine taped to our refrigerator for months.  Now it is taped to the inside of the desk cupboard; forever there if I need it.

I hope this is helpful information.  I don’t want anyone to have to go through what I went through.  But unfortunately (or fortunately), it does take hitting rock bottom before a change can occur.

Remember, God can bring a greater good out of every bad situation.  He will never abandon you no matter how alone you feel.