Today, I would like to take a break from my normal writing routine to give you a smorgasbord of tasty treats to sink your teeth into.

I am not the only blogger out there who writes on depression, anxiety, eating disorders, and mental health, of course.  In case you wanted more to read than what I have to offer, look below for some excellent articles.

Some of these bloggers can be found in my “Weblog Wonders” column if you would like future reference material.  I update the list from time to time as I discover more writers who see the world as I see it.

I’ve learned a lot from these writers over the past several months.  They are more than deserving of the highlight I am posting here.  I guarantee you will enjoy reading their posts as much as you enjoy reading my posts.

This excellent piece here, written by Margarita Tartakovsky of Weightless, perfectly captures my feelings toward that ominous metal apparatus in the bathroom, the one with the arrow and the numbers and starts with an “s”.  If you are struggling to separating your self-worth from the number on the scale, I promise you will love this post.

This next article here is from Caroline McGraw who wrote a guest post for Tiny Buddha.  If you are an introvert like me and have struggled with feeling guilty for taking time for yourself, read this article!

Sometimes the simple things make a big difference.  This one paragraph gave me tremendous hope the other day.  Sometimes all you need is a reminder that everything will be OK.  The paragraph is short, straight-forward, and technical…it is by no means an official blog post.  However, just hearing it from the professionals gave me a jolt back in the right direction.  Read it here.

I couldn’t have said it better myself.  This is exactly why I write about body image.  Thanks again, Margarita, this post is excellent!
  Hope you're not too full of information now!  If you couldn't read it all in one sitting, come back this weekend to sort through these great articles.
  I’ll close with this awesome quote that I found in an unlikely place.  Prepare to let it rock your world.
   “Books are written by authors to be read, even if large ones are used as doorstops or discarded ones help ignite campfires. The fact that many lie unread and covered with dust, or piled atop coffee tables for decorative effect doesn’t mean they were not destined for higher purpose.”  -By Gregory Koukl, President, Stand to Reason
  Have a nourishing weekend!