I made the mistake of checking my bank account balance yesterday. Let's just say that if my account balance was a pile of rocks, I would not have a very big pile of rocks. In fact, if we lived in a society where rocks were used as a sort of primitive currency, I would not have enough rocks to pay rent. This realization prompted me to reevaluate my spending in an attempt to find things I could cut out of my budget. Here are my total superfluous expenses for the month of June:

1. Food that tastes good
2. "Fancy" tampons
3. Overdue movie rentals
4. One issue of Cosmopolitan magazine
5. Midol
6. Highlighters 
7. Dessert


I had no choice but to eliminate all but the most essential expenditures, so I resigned myself to a more spartan existence.   

Day-One without my luxuries went surprisingly well, until about 9:00 PM. It is at about that time that I usually have dessert.  When I realized that I was not going to get dessert - not even the next night or the night after that - I began to panic.  For the first time in my life, I briefly considered prostitution. How hard could it be?  Craigslist has turned the world into a virtual street corner. My mind started churning over the angles I could use to advertise myself:  


slightly used 1985 model female companion.  All original parts. 1 previous owner. Fairly low maintenance. 20 miles per pint of Ben and Jerry's.  $50 or equivalent amount of chocolate/tampons. 

So sexy... 


An ad of this magnitude would surely garner me all the chocolate and fancy tampons I could ever dream of! I could even buy two different-colored highlighters if I felt so inclined! 

Just as I was getting excited about my prostitution-fueled candyland, my boyfriend reminded me that I respect myself too much to actually go through with selling my body for dessert and feminine hygiene products. But I am not so sure. My moral standards get a little hazy when I am facing this kind of deprivation.

My boyfriend also brought to my attention that I wouldn't actually be making as much money as I thought because I would definitely have to get myself a pimp "for protection." My boyfriend is always looking out for my safety and well-being! 

I have not, as of yet, put up my ad on Craigslist, but it is almost lunchtime and I am already sick of rice. 