Milestones.  Sometimes I am so busy watching for these in my children that I miss very important ones that are staring me in the face.  This week is yet another busy, rough week for our family.  I have two appointments for Jack's study in D.C., we had no daycare on Monday, the boys don't have school Thursday or Friday and I have two parent-teacher conferences on Thursday at two different schools.  EEK!  Oh and also almost no time off left from work due to all of these appointments.

I aprised my husband of this situation several days ago.  I realized that I was bracing myself as I did so.  In the past, if I am being honest, I would have expected to figure this all out myself.  Sometimes working from home just comes with that responsibility, it's assumed that I can take care of it.  But now it was, "well, I'll take Friday off to watch the boys, we'll have to figure something out for Thursday."  And when I expressed my concern that I wouldn't be able to make it home from D.C in time to get Jack off the bus today, my husband offered to come home early and meet the bus, then he went and picked Nate up from daycare because I was running even later than I expected after answering 3 straight hours of questions about Jack's development for a psychiatrist.  Yeah, that was pretty much torture.  Did he point to objects at ages 3,4,5, how about now, but when he pointed did he follow his finger with his eyes and then look back at you to make sure you were looking or did he only look at the object, or did he only look at you, or did he look at the ground (actually he did the hokey pokey). 

As I was sitting in traffic I thought about how far we have come as a family unit- far enough that while my "old brain" braces for the storm, my logical brain knows that as parents we are a team now.  I don't feel like I am alone anymore, at all.  How awesome is that.

I don't know if anyone remembers that movie "The Story of Us"?  Michelle Pfeiffer and Bruce Willis?  It didn't get nearly as much attention as it should have in my opinion.  It is a really great story of a marriage, the ups and downs, the ultimate decision to give up or dig deeper, and it always got to me, even before I was married. Michelle Pfeiffer does this awesome monologue at the end of the movie that always made me sob like a baby, and I started thinking about it this afternoon.  Now it's stuck in my mind.  For those of you who have been married awhile, does it strike a chord with you too?  Just love it....



OK, cheesy moment done.  You're welcome.