This post is me.  Complaining.  So if you don't want to hear it....stop. here. 

The schedule is getting kinda cramped again.  I did it to myself of course, but with the best of intentions.  I am still doing the massage for both boys, and although I can't say that I have seen major improvements at this point (other than both boys tolerating more touch), I enjoy doing it.  I enjoy the time with each child.  And about 2 weeks ago we started the OT listening program with Jack:
http://www.vitallinks.net/

It involves him listening to music twice a day for about 30 minutes each time.  I know this doesn't necessarily sound like it should take that much of my time, but we have to use these specific headphones and of course these headphones do not want to stay on the boy's head.  I have wrapped the top in trainer's tape and am now using a headband to hold them on, but I basically have to sit there and watch him the whole time in order to make sure he doesn't take them off. 

Both boys are getting the shots 3x a week at this point.  On the bright side, Jack no longer cries.  He screams at me to stop, giggles, and then goes back to what he was doing.  I think this is progress?  The new supplements just keep coming and coming.  I have been to Jack's school for a meeting every week for basically the past 4 weeks.  He keeps hurting himself at school- the school nurse and I are now on a first name basis.  I am going in for another meeting on Thursday, and supposed to volunteer on Wednesday.  Been home with a sick Natey the past 2 days- although this did give me a chance to try out my new steam mop.  I know, dare to dream!

I am constantly overwhelmed at home, overwhelmed to the point where sometimes all I can do is just sit there and think about everything I need to do.  This is not especially productive.

I guess I am saying that I am feeling that all too familiar drowning feeling that many moms experience.  I need a vacation.  I need a break.  A real one.  Not two hours at Target, or a TACA meeting without the kids.  Not the planned excursion for my birthday- a TACA conference with the husband.  I need an umbrella drink, a masseuse, a beach.  I actually did have a half hour massage last Saturday- wanna know what the masseuse said???? I don't think I can really help you in this short a period of time, this is really bad.  After the thirty minutes, she poured some icy hot on my back and we called it a day.  Actually helped quite a lot, I recommend trying it if you haven't before.  And here I thought it was only good for shin splints. 

Back to this whole vacation "idea".  Who gives the shots when I run away from home?  Who knows how to give this massage?  It's only going to get worse in the next few weeks, as our sitter is leaving us.  How dare she move to PA to be with her own grandkids???  So now I have a daycare search to conduct, which is one of my least favorite activities. 

OK, I'm done :-)