Excellent weekend!  I would probably say this no matter what just because of the weather, which is heavenly, but it was made extra special by a very alert, verbal Nathan.  As usual, John and I are trying not to get too excited- but we did just start him on the "speak smooth" this past week, so fingers crossed.  Today was an especially good day for him.  We went to our favorite haunt, the airport playground this morning, and Nate really enjoyed climbing all over the place.  He did his usual sitting on the ground and digging through the recycled tire ground cover for 20 minutes at a time thing, but he also played with daddy quite a bit.  Got a few good shots....

\
He conked out on the drive home at around 12:30 and slept until about 2:30, which is a pretty good nap for him.  He woke up ready to go and more alert than we have seen him in awhile.  He hadn't had lunch yet so I put him up in his seat.  He immediately started pointing around the room, saying "that" over and over again.  He hasn't pointed constructively in a really long time.  This made us feel a little giddy.  Then he said "more cup" and "more bread".  We are noticing some more 2 word phrases like this lately.  We have been the meanest parents on earth for quite awhile, refusing to get him "more" unless he says or at least indicates in some way exactly what he wants.  It seems to be paying off.  His Mimi came for a visit, and while we were sitting there talking, he kept saying "more" again and again.  Since he wasn't telling us what he wanted we were studiously ignoring him.  All of the sudden we hear "I want more!"  Thank God he said it in front of 3 adults, or we wouldn't believe it ourselves.  This was really really big for him.  Later he walked over to his school backpack, pulled on it and said "go bye bye".  Holy mother of moses!  

Here are a few more shots of him focused on his books....so sweet, and new for him....

John, Nate and I were hanging out in the kitchen while Jack and Mimi were playing and Nate started in with one of his favorite games with mommy.  It's kind of embarrassing, but he likes to smack my head to the side while I make this ridiculous noise and then laugh like a little maniac.  He also loves to shove his finger down my throat- not so funny to mommy.  PLEASE excuse my presence in the below video.  I just wanted you to see Natey having fun and really engaging.  I also wanted you to see how affectionate he can be.  I hear stories from other parents of children with autism about how disconnected they sometimes feel from their children- how they never get hugs, or eye contact, how they feel like their kids don't even notice when they're not there.  I don't know if I could live with that, honestly.  I am so so lucky that this boy is so loving.....