My little Jack said something devastating to me today.....he was playing with my pandora bracelet, which he often does, and he grabbed the airplane charm (which is my charm for him) and said "take this off, we need a crab!"  Oh no......this can't be happening.  Airplanes have been such an integral part of our lives for over 3 years now.....are we really, gasp, moving on????


I have mentioned in previous posts that Jack's main passion in life has been airplanes, but I thought I would take just a few minutes (and pictures) to pay tribute to Jack's first true obsession.  Mommy and daddy know more about airplanes than we ever thought we would, or hoped to for that matter.  For instance, did you know that the Albatross is the pride of the German fighter squadron?  Me neither 3 years ago....I also never knew of the phenomenon known as the Fokker triplane.  We have been through the Blue Angels, the "Top Secret" or Blackbird, the Stealth bomber and fighter (and he WILL correct you if you mix them up), the Curtiss Jenny, the Spad, the P-38, the P51 Mustang....to name a very few.  And now he says he's done???  Oh no, I don't think so!  If he's done, then I get to go through all of it- I need closure darn it!

It all began when he was nearing the age of 2.....when he realized that propellers could spin much faster than blades of grass....









Yes, I realize that the cake is a train (I did make it after all), but see the empty car?  That had a plane on it.  Guess who grabbed it before I could get a picture?

And we were off and running....
 at the firehouse.....

 the pumpkin patch....
on horseback...
visiting the new baby brother....

first day of school....

Then there were the airplane adventures....
The airshow (or as daddy and I like to call it....the day from HELL)



The boy was SO OVERWHELMED from the moment we got there.....cried almost the entire day.  good times!

The airport museum...




Could he be any cuter in that cap????

And then there was the trip to the Outer Banks, when daddy and I shelled out some money to take Jack (and Nate) on an aerial tour of the area.  The pilot's name was Eric, the plane's name was Rosie.  It was the best day ever!




Best money we ever spent!

When Jack turned three, he asked for an airplane birthday party.  One thing with Jack....I have never regretted paying attention to detail with him.  He appreciates everything I do when it comes to a "theme".  He noticed everything at his airplane party.  I had to hide all of his toy planes so he wouldn't lose it if his buddies tried to play with them, so instead I replaced them with about 100 gliders.  I figured there was no way he could hold them all, so he would have to be ok with other kids playing with them.  It worked!  Another great day!

black craft paper runway, balloon clouds, paper airplanes.....




Then there was his blue angel halloween costume....

mommy spray painted the helmet yellow and ordered "authentic" decals off of ebay.  The boy was in heaven....




He also tried to "share" his passion with Natey at times...



So really son?  You're done????  Now what???  I hate to tell you this, but mommy HATES hermit crabs.  They are gross.  And the way their legs just spring out of the shell is creepy.  And they are smelly.  Oh man....I miss airplanes!!!!