After a day like today, I could sit and stew- it would take no effort at all.  I am extremely overwhelmed after what I thought was our last "big" meeting for this fall- this is not the case.  Nate will be starting his new school, taking the bus in less than 2 weeks, the Monday after Thanksgiving, and there is A LOT to be done.  The meeting was rough.  But here I am.  And I don't want to stew.  Because Natey was running around and laughing this evening without a care in the world.  And that's what matters right?  So instead, I need to do a little catch-up.  I can't get myself on to Facebook daily to participate in the what I am grateful for thing for November, so since today is the 12th, I am just going to stick my entries on my blog.  I will make a committment to do it once a week for the rest of the month.  That's my best offer, lol.
12 things I am grateful for:
1.  The fact that my friend Helen's sweet baby boy, who is a preemie, was able to come home from the hospital.  Such amazing amazing news.
2. My husband, who turned down a fishing trip this morning in order to accompany me to Nate's IEP meeting- thank you!
3. Both of my boys' wonderful teachers, who constantly go above and beyond to make sure their needs are met.
4.  Our home and our ability to stay in an area with excellent schools
5.  Two little boys whose faces lights up whenever I walk into a room- there is no better feeling in the world
6.  My parents and John's mom- their support has been so appreciated.
7.  Melatonin- enough said
8.  I am beyond grateful that my boys were born to me- this journey, while difficult, has made me a much different, and frankly better person.
9.  My ability to do laundry during work hours
10.  Good friends, both old and new
11.  Hope and healing- without these I would still be stuck down in the well that was my life last year
12. well this is a no-brainer.....COFFEE!!!!!!

The most awesome part of this exercise is that this year I could just keep going and going.....for every hardship I have had I have experienced a blessing, met an amazing new person, learned an important truth, gained new perspective.  And today I made it through another meeting.  Made it through.  Phew.