Yesterday just sucked.  The Valentine's aspects of the day were great, hubs sent flowers, I made him a s'more bouquet, that was very nice.  I took a half day in order to go to both boys' Valentine's Day parties.

Nate's was up first.  He did pretty well with me there other than being velcro boy- gluing himself to me the minute he saw me.  It's hard to see him in that classroom- almost none of the children are talking, there's some signing and a whole lot attempted interpretation.  Love the teacher though.  From the minute I got there Nate was grabbing my face and saying "ma".  And then "come, go".  AKA let's blow this popsicle stand.  Sweet boy.

Then I went to Jack's class party.  It was a mommy nightmare.  I know he was a bit amped up to have me there, I know he was excited to be at the party.  There were 4 other moms there volunteering, and thank God because I was unable to leave Jack's side the entire time.  He was so off task, I had to literally hold his hands to his craft project to help him focus on actually doing it.  He was running everywhere.  One of the hardest things to see was that some of the kids are starting to react negatively to him.  Wanting him to go away, telling him to be quiet.  The minute they realized I was his mom several kids gathered around me and started telling me that they can't get their work done b/c Jack is always interrupting them.  Believe me, I know the feeling guys.  Still very difficult to hear.  I mean, he is frustrating his classmates.  Several of the kids did tell me that they like Jack, because they like to help him.  There was no aid with him, and I have come to the difficult decision that I need to fight harder than I already have.  He needs someone glued to his side, at the very least.

I walked over to his teacher at one point and said, how is he ever going to be able to be in a classroom?  She said, that's not something I have the power to ask, only you can ask that.  Her answer told me everything I needed to know- this is not working.  Tears sprang to my eyes right there in the classroom, although I managed to hold them off, and they're back right now as I think about it.   I am devastated and don't know where to turn.  I spoke with the advocate and she suggested the administration.  I have spoken with the assistant principal and have a meeting with her and the principal next week.  Piece meal is not going to cut it.  A dedicated aid hopefully will, at this moment, after what I observed yesterday, I'm just not sure of anything anymore.

Please say a little prayer for my spirit, I am feeling very very down right now.