Today is my 1 year blogiversary!  I can hardly believe it.  I never thought I would get the type of response that I have.  I initially started the blog to keep family and friends updated, to vent a bit, to avoid being asked the same questions over and over.  I have definitely accomplished this.  I just wasn't necessarily expecting that other people would be interested too!  Now, I am not a frequently viewed blog by blog standards, I don't have thousands of views everyday.  However, I do have about 80-100 views each day.  I have had close to 20,000 views over all.  I have about 100 facebook followers and over 600 twitter followers.  Not too shabby for a year's work!

The blog has become so much more than just an update vehicle to myself and my family.  My first entry was the result of feeling very very alone, of feeling desperate for some support from somewhere.  And it came in droves.  I tried to prepare myself for both negative and positive feedback.  The negative never really came, and this has truly become my sanctuary.  A place where I can vent about, pray for, praise, or freak out about the boys.  A place where I can honestly share the impact that the boys' challenges have on my life, my work, my marriage.  I thought I was losing my family when I started the blog- instead, it is more solid than it has ever been.  I was feeling hopeless when I first wrote- I can't say we have made crazy progress, but I have documentation of the progress we have had, and it is there.  And that means something to me. 

Thank you to each and every one of my readers.  I was saying to a friend of mine last week that I am always amazed when I run into people I haven't seen in a long time- I never know who reads in general, but these days it is immediately obvious by the person's greeting.  I either get "how are the boys?" or "I read your blog every day".  The people who read don't have to ask.  And that was the point!  Your support means everything to me.  I know I could do all that I am doing without writing about it, but this outlet really does help me process everything. 