Look at us.  I look at this picture and I can see every emotion that was running through my head that day.  I was so happy, full of joy, and incredibly hopeful for our future.   It was an amazing day and one I will never forget.  It’s been 9 years today, which just feels amazing.  Don’t be calling me a newlywed- we are in the trenches baby.

Where are we?  I haven’t given an update on our family unit in a while.  There just really hasn’t been a need for one.  We are, in a word, solid.  We are at peace.  We are insane.  And we are busy. Most importantly, we are together.  The insecurity of the past few years is long gone, we have “graduated” from counseling and only return every few months to check in.  AKA, when there are so many moving parts in a family, it’s easy to start going through the motions.  We go, we sit, we make sure we are on the same page, and we move on.  I think we bore our counselor at this point.  How awesome is that?

Last year, our anniversary felt like such a triumph, because we were really still in the throes of overcoming all that had happened in our family.  This year- I just feel a sense of calm.  I am not worried about us anymore.  I am not worried about outside factors impacting our relationship.  We won’t let that happen, our family is too important.

So today, when I am feeling so very thankful for my family, I want to make sure and include all of you who support our marriage and family on a daily basis.  If it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a jam packed stadium of devoted fans to cheer a couple through all of the obstacles we have overcome.  You all know who you are, and you know how much we love you. 

I am a cheese ball today so forgive me.  The below song is on my ipod and when I took a walk today it happened to play.  This is how I feel now- like we have come through a storm, and have gained the respect of those around us.  Like we have found the support we need in each other and in those who have had faith in us.   

Oh and John, love you to pieces, and thank you.