OK mommies, I am having one of THOSE mornings.  Please don't make me....get out of bed, make the beds, make the breakfast, give the supplements, get dressed, pack the lunches, give the shot, dress the kids, get Nate out the door, then walk Jack to the bus.....or log in, check voice mail, return calls, put in authorizations, talk to/yell at/beg people?!  At least it's leftover night.

I am proud to say that the only thing I forgot to do this morning despite this feeling of blah was unlock the door for the sitter.  One out of like three hundred isn't bad right? Anyone else feel completely overwhelmed every single morning?

I want to SLEEP.  The headache is creeping back in, I am sure it has nothing to do with a certain 5 year old climbing into our bed at 4:30 am and doing his best hermit crab impression in order to wake me up.  Or any of the other stressors in my life currently.  Just because when I turn my head slightly to the left I feel it all the way down to my waist....nah.  The sitter took one look at me this morning and suggested I take the day off and just let myself sleep.  If only I had the time off to take- all of my time off goes to the boys' appointments and Nate's more than words class.  I went to the dentist this week and they had to "reactivate" my account.  Yes I am ashamed- I just haven't been the priority recently, you know? I am not complaining about that- I am grateful to be able to do what I do with the boys, but would I like a day off?  Heck yes!   And then....the final nail in my coffin...John tells me we are out of coffee.  Noooooooooooo!!!!!!!  This situation must be remedied immediately.  Jack has early dismissal today while his teachers busily work on "attacking the gap".  Seriously, they do this once a month, must be a bugger.  John and I have a 9:15 pm counseling appointment tonight.....that should be fun.  Everything is GREAT....I'll just be over here taking a little snooze, talk amongst yourselves.  Here, I'll give you a topic:



So if anyone stops by today and sees a keyboard impression in my cheek, I have no idea how it got there.  I am up and at em and ready to go.....really I am.  Just a few shots of espresso and I should be back to n.o..r...m....a.....l......

ugh.  All right, I am done whining now.  Just one of those days.