So much to say, so much to say.  First I would have to say that John has earned the husband gold star for the day.  Not only did he watch the boys for 12 hours so that I could embark on this trip down memory lane, but when the power went out (yes, you read that correctly, the power went out AGAIN), his text to me said, and I quote "we will be fine hon, don't worry".  That means more than all the flowers in the world.  LOVE YOU and thank you!  And luckily, THIS time it was only a few hours....



So today I headed "home" for the day.  The main purpose of the trip was to attend one of my oldest friend's baby shower, but being the multi-tasker that I am, I managed to cram this day as full of meaning as I possibly could.  I took my mom with me, it was our first outing without the boys since, well, since Jack was born (that would be 5 years people).  It was also my first trip back home since before John and I got engaged- so that would be 10 years.  Holy Moly!
yep, no resemblance at all...

When I tell people I'm from "Jersey" I know that it conjures up a certain image.  Smoke stacks right?  Allow me to introduce you to my New Jersey- Medford Lakes....1 square mile, 5 beaches, countless bike trails, 1 golf course, 1 "trading post", 1 church, 1 police station, 2 elementary/middle schools.  And that is ALL.

our old house....

Some pictures of our town.....
bike path

beach




So as you can see, it's beautiful.  I was very very lucky to grow up here (at least from age 10 on).  Our little neighborhood was especially tight, I had three "moms" and "dads", and felt completely at ease walking into all of those homes unannounced.  I babysat all of the kids in the neighborhood, most since infancy.  And yes, they have all pretty much graduated from college at this point, gasp, I am OLD!  My mom and I met up with one of my other "moms" (and a close friend of the whole family) for brunch today.  It was just wonderful.



Meet dad #2, Dan.  Hilarious guy who is currently working with mom #2 on completely gutting house #3 that they have renovated in Medford Lakes.  I will never forget the first time I babysat at their house- I was 14....the first thing he said to me was "stay out of the liquor cabinet!".  You have to know me pretty well to understand just how absurd of a statement this was.  I was pretty tame.  Of course, he also happened to spot me the ONE time I smoked a cigarette in high school, and I was like a mile from our house- he held it over my head for YEARS.  I told my mom about it today, ha.
Here is mom #2 Bobbie- we had an awesome brunch and had a chance to catch up.  Hadn't seen her since my wedding day!  Love her!
After brunch we headed over to my friend Pam's childhood home.  Pam is one of my oldest friends, one of the first people I met when I moved to New Jersey.  We were 10.  We have been lucky enough to stay in pretty close touch- she moved to Annapolis shortly after Jack was born, and just recently left me to move to North Carolina with her husband.  Sigh, if you must :).  I have never been so happy to see one of my friends preggers!  She looks fabulous, and there's just something about seeing an old friend so happy....
I asked her today if she remembers why her nickname was Pamer, and she had no idea either....

gorgeous pregnant lady!

mom won!
Pamer and her mommy!


Despite 6 hours in the car, today left me feeling so invigorated!  I forgot how much it means to feel like you're "home".  I forgot how great it is to drive down a street and have a hundred memories come to mind.  I think I need to go home more often!