Just realized this is the longest I have gone without posting in months.  I truly am in a funk.  I wake up every morning, look at my kids and think "you want breakfast AGAIN?"  The prospect of completing the morning routine is just overwhelming at the moment, as is working all day.  And dinner?  What dinner?  Was I supposed to cook that?  oops

What's the issue?  I am sure that some of it is depression, which is something I have battled intermittenly throughout adulthood.  But much of it is pain.  I am on day 5 of yet another migraine and it's just getting old.  A few weeks ago I was watching that commercial on TV- the one about using botox for chronic migraines.  I listened to their description of the appropriate candidate for this treatment and felt sorry for individuals in that situation.  Then I started to think back- I would say I have averaging 1-2 migraines a week these past few months with most of them lasting several days.  It's pretty awful, and actually, it puts me into the category of "acceptable candidate" for botox.  Not that I'm going to do it, but I guess I just didn't realize it had gotten this bad.

I have been going to a chiropractor to work on a back injury ( you know, from when I moved the elliptical machine to the garage) and told him about the headache situation.  He did quite a bit of work on my neck last week when I went, cracking things way too many times to be normal.  The good news is that for about 36 hours I was completely pain free (not counting my back).  Then the headache came again.  I was supposed to search for triggers also, so far this is what I found- Jack's meltdowns, any arguments, running, coffee, beer, wine, cocktails, menstrual cycle, too little sleep.  Well that pretty much covers everything now doesn't it?  I would be even more nervous if I hadn't had a head CT last fall during a particularly awful headache, one when I thought I was having an aneurysm.  Everything looked ok, and migraines run in our family, so I have attributed it to that.  Of course, brain tumors also run in my family...ugh.

Luckily the boys have been pretty good the past few days, and I have been getting some rest, in the evenings thanks to my hubby.  I just need a break from all of this, it's yucky.  What I really need is a few days away from all of the stressors and responsibilities of this life- my husband always answers that we should definitely try to do that sometime, we need time away from the kids.  I laugh- I meant ME!  All alone!  Tall order I know, and not likely to happen, but a girl can dream.  I can picture it now- me, quiet, my own bed....sigh. 

I'm sure anyone who has migraines can completely relate.  I feel so blah. 