The Hills are alive with the sounds of shrieking parents....can you hear them??  "NO NO NO NO!!!!"  All parents.  Whether pro or anti vaccine, one theme is consistent.  Kristen Cavallari is NOT affiliated with us!  Of all the "poster children" to come forward.  Sigh.....

http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-moms/news/kristin-cavallari-didnt-vaccinate-son-camden-fears-autism-2014143


I watched the Hills, I was nursing my babies and in the middle of the night shallow, fake drama was right up my alley.  My mental capacity was greatly reduced in those days, it was a perfect fit!

I really really wish she hadn't said what she did.  If  I had to choose any representative of any cause on the planet, it would not be her.  I don't know her, I don't dislike her, but I do know her public "persona".  She has always been shallow, catty and lacked direction on her "reality shows".  They were fake reality and I get that, so maybe she is extremely intelligent, she certainly has the financial means to have a top notch education.  But she took a job, in which she was portrayed as an airhead.  So please don't speak out against vaccines Kristen Cavallari.  I know you had NO idea what you were getting yourself into.  This is one of the most heated debates in the world, and one that your nose really really needed to stay out of.  Especially if your explanation for not vaccinating your children was going to be that you have read way too many books on autism, and vaccines still have a bunch of "mercury and stuff".  Somehow, you managed to insult people with autism while simultaneously enraging the scientific community who swears up and down that vaccines are completely safe.  That's quite a feat.  Truly.

Vaccines do not have mercury or thimersol anymore.  Except the flu shot- it still has mercury.  My kids' pediatrician recommends against it.  Vaccinations have aluminum, get it straight.  Because apparently that's a safe heavy metal.

I am not going to get on the vaccine pro/con bandwagon in this post, I am not, I am not.  Oh screw it.   I have my beliefs, my children are fully vaccinated.  Knowing what I know today they would still be fully vaccinated.  Would I have requested a more spread out schedule?  Why yes, I do think I would have.  I do think it would have been more gentle to my boys' delicate immune systems that based on genetic testing, have an impaired ability to clear toxins.  Even in this circumstance, vaccines are there for a reason.  Has anyone been watching NBC's documentary on the refugee children of Syria?  Has anyone seen the little boy who has all of the symptoms of polio?  I wouldn't wish that on anyone's child, it's just horrible.  And we all have a social responsibility to try and prevent the spread of such horrible illnesses.  Unfortunately, when it comes to this topic, when debates are started it is black and white.  You do it.  You don't.  Not vaccinating, is a risky road, in my opinion.  Unless there is a specific medical reason, unless there is a known genetic issue that makes it dangerous to the child.  That's different.  Blindly stating that you are not going to vaccinate your child because you are "afraid" of autism???  Not ok.  Do you know anyone with autism?  I do- two amazing someones.  I wish they didn't have autism, it makes their lives extremely challenging.  But autism is not the bubonic plague, it's not polio either.  You can't die of autism.

Ever since I did my reading about vaccines, I have taken the middle of the road approach.  Ask for them one at a time, ask for them preservative free.  THAT is thinking.  THAT is protecting your child in every way possible.  THAT is avoiding your child getting a Hep B vaccine when they are 24 hours old and watching them scream for over 24 hours after ward and consequently wondering for the rest of your life what that did to your son.  Vaccines are absolutely necessary, I do believe that.  I believe in moderation.  I don't understand why one has to be pro or anti.  I mean, I guess a am pro?  Or semi-pro?  Or amateur?  Or maybe I am pro but with an IEP???  Mom will ensure that child completes 3 out of 5 recommended vaccines within the next 6 months with zero prompts.

Anyway- Kristen, you have bitten off so much more than you can chew.  I think you should have your son vaccinated, slowly and with research.  That is my opinion.  Might as well throw it out there since you are going to get everyone else's too.