OK, so I promised myself that I would run a race for autism this year if it killed me.  And this one looks like it could be fun for everyone.  I am sharing it here for two reasons:  1.  to hold myself accountable and 2.  because they are doing teams for the first time this year.  So if you are interested in joining me in the run, or doing the fun run/walk either facebook message me or email me jjpnurse@msn.com.  Or if you want to contribute financially, that would be lovely too.  I will wait until the end of the weekend, if I have several families that would like to join me, then I will create a team, if not, then we can all register individually.

http://www.pathfindersforautism.org/news/view/300#features

The race takes place on Sunday Sept 16th.  It's at the Maryland Zoo.  All families that have a child with autism get free admission to the zoo for the day on race day!  It looks like if there is a team, the whole team gets free admission.  If not, any other participants at least get discounted admission on that day.

Here's a little background on Pathfinder's for Autism (we have been getting acquainted this past year):


Pathfinders, Inc. (d/b/a Pathfinders for Autism) was established as a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization in February 2000 by parents of children with autism, including Baltimore Orioles Hall of Famer William "B.J." Surhoff, his wife Polly Winde Surhoff. After 18 months of development, Pathfinders for Autism launched the Pathfinders for Autism Resource Center – offering knowledgeable staff and a searchable online database to help families in Maryland find critical service providers quickly and efficiently.
Since then, Pathfinders for Autism has grown into the State's largest autism organization dedicated to helping individuals, parents and professionals find resources, supports and training while working to increase the awareness of autism spectrum disorders and advocating for the needs of individuals with autism and their families. We are proud of what we've been able to accomplish and look forward to continued successes in the years ahead.

Very worthy cause!