  Other than a dimple in a cute little chin,
What's more adorable than a toothless grin?
3 weeks ago

yesterday!!!!


There is entirely too much growing up going on in this household!  Kindergarten in 3 weeks, swimming like a little fish, and now 2 lost teeth!  My own little snaggle tooth!

Of course we do nothing in the typical fashion in this household, so when Jack lost his first tooth and we told him about the tooth fairy, he was like no way, not in my room!  We literally had to sit down and write the tooth fairy a note asking her not to come just to calm him down.  He wanted NOTHING  to do with it.  Instead, he wanted to go to the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, you know, like most kids, haha.  Mom and Dad certainly weren't going to say no to this, after all it is the only place one can go to see a BF-109 Messerschmidt in the area.  So we took the boys and they did pretty well- other than being overwhelmed by the crowds.  It was hopping.

Jack heaven!!


So Jack nonchalantly walked over to me yesterday while eating an apple, said "here mom", and put something in my hand. I asked what it was.  He calmly said "my tooth".  HA!  I decided we were going to try something a little different.  I mentioned the tooth fairy in passing and he started in with "no, no" again.  Then I asked him if it would be ok if we left the tooth under a pillow on the dining room table, just like we leave cookies for Santa and carrots for the Easter bunny.  That way, this fairy person would not have to intrude in his bedroom (and to be honest, mommy and daddy are loathe to go in Jack's room when he is sleeping anyway- 8 out 10 times he wakes up), but could still take his tooth and we could all be happy.  Amazingly, he agreed!



So it was a success- Jack was excited to see that the tooth fairy had come this morning, no muss no fuss.  Meanwhile, all John and I could do was stare at these two little teeth and think.....about how many sleepless nights they caused us, how many first foods they chomped, how many times we brushed them while our child with major oromotor issues screamed......ahhhhhh sweet memories, lol