Wow.  Today was intense.  No, Frankenstorm has not yet reached us, although intense preparations are in progress- generator is gassed, in the wagon, and aimed at the exit of our garage, extension cords are detangled, we have purchased water, beer, wine, beer, wine, D batteries.  We are ready.

However that is not what this post is about.  I had an amazing opportunity today (as did our entire local TACA chapter) to hear the illustrious Dr. Anju Usman speak.  She is a prominent DAN! doctor who is based in Illinois.  It was amusing really, they turned the lights down at the beginning of the lecture, then changed their minds, worried people might doze, and turned them back up.  This was information for my children- my ears were glued wide open- the only way I was dozing off was if I received a blow to my head.

The main topic of the lecture was the gut-brain connection in autism and various treatment modalities.  All of this is controversial.  The medical community at large has not accepted these practices as of yet, mainstream medicine still considers autism to be a behavior/mental disorder.  Here is the basic definition in Stedman's Medical Dictionary (one of the first texts you are handed in nursing school- or at least in the "old days", haha)

A mental disorder characterized by severely abnormal development of social interaction and of verbal and nonverbal communication skills. Affected people may adhere to inflexible, nonfunctional rituals or routines. They may become upset with even trivial changes in their environment. They often have a limited range of interests but may become preoccupied with a narrow range of subjects or activities. They appear unable to understand others' feelings and often have poor eye contact with others. Unpredictable mood swings may occur. Many demonstrate stereotypical motor mannerisms such as hand or finger flapping, body rocking, or dipping. The disorder is probably caused by organically based central nervous system dysfunction, especially in the ability to process social or emotional information or language. Cf.: Asperger disorder
There is of course no mention of genetics, actual medical causes, and certainly nothing about the GI tract in this definition.  In order to start learning about these aspects of autism (and note that I do not say theories, as I believe them to be fact), one has to do their own research, to connect with the right people, to stumble upon an amazing pediatrician like our family did.  Our first pediatrician labeled Jack manipulative and "difficult".  The first developmental pediatrician told me not to bother with any special diets, if I wanted to try anything, B vitamins would be a good idea.  So when we first went to see our current pediatrician and she started talking diets, supplements, blood, stool and urine tests, I was overwhelmed to say the least.  Last fall was a blur of trying to implement everything that was being thrown at me, and then trying to understand why!  And I was a biochemistry major!  Can't imagine how other parents with different backgrounds must feel when confronted with all of this.  I thought our pediatrician was so "radical", and for a general ped she is, but in reality she was just getting us started on the right path.  And I have known for awhile that there is much more that we need to do.  Today just drove that point home a little more.  Consider me once again overwhelmed and confused.  I am not confused about the actual interventions, not even their scientific basis. I don't know what to do first, I don't know what each of my kids needs.  And they are so stinking different.  We go to see our autism doctor in less than two weeks- I will be armed and dangerous when I walk in to his office. 

Dr. Usman went through all of the functions of the GI tract, which was in general a review for me. Then she went in to many of the issues that can cause impairment in the function of the GI tract- bacteria, yeast, "leaky gut" (basically not absorbing nutrients appropriately)- it's all very complex, and if I were on the outside of this situation looking in I would find it completely fascinating.  Instead I find it horrifying- when it's your kid, you're sitting on the edge of your seat, you want too throw yourself at this person's feet and scream fix them, please!  Of course I didn't do this- I was grateful just to hear her speak for 3 hours. 

I am going to try to curtail the amount of information I communicate, as I know I have a tendency to start throwing a million different things out there and making people feel like their heads are going to explode (lol). I will say that the things that she talked about in her lecture touched on almost all of my areas of concern for the boys.  The very first thing she talked about, before she began her own lecture, was the MTHFR gene and research being conducted on this and what they are now calling "cerebral folate deficiency".  This just confirmed that I will be asking the autism doctor for an Rx for methyl folate.  I think the boys need it and I think he will agree.

Other areas that I have new plans for:
Jack's attention- I want to try GABA for him- Lee Silsby, my favorite compounding pharmacy has a cream- how much more convenient can you get when your kid can't swallow pills yet? 
Their guts- I want them retested for yeast (this is at least $200 out of pocket for each of them, sigh).  In fact I don't think Jack was ever tested for yeast- and he had major dental issues last year. This is a sign of many nutritional issues including gluten intolerance, but it can also be a sign of yeast.  He has many of the hallmark signs of yeast overgrowth- I am just so worried about Nate's speech all the time that I feel like I overlooked it.  They both likely need more probiotics and more cleansing diets- ie, fewer processed foods.  Nate may even need more antifungal medication to treat his preexisting yeast. 

There are many many other things that need to be investigated.  So many that I just can't even get into it here yet.  I need to sit down and do some major research.  In between preparing for the hurricane, reading for my More Than Words Class and developing new goal oriented behavioral play plans for Nathan that will be videotaped again soon, trying to keep up with the current interventions, cleaning, doing laundry and going to work.  Oh and cooking the special diets.  And Jack's OT gave me about 5 articles to read today, and "prescribed" several new interventions.  And even our marriage counselor handed us articles on autism and interventions this week- everyone is getting in on the action :).  I don't believe in cloning- except, right now, for me.  I need two of me.  (Ok Helen you can be cloned right now too, and Jo you too) I am glad that I feel overwhelmed by valuable information and the number of interventions that I want to try for the boys.  At least I am not lost, at least there is something I can do.  Man, I really need to make some lists!  

Sending some prayers to my two dear friends mentioned above.  You have both been so incredibly supportive of my family, and I will do anything I can to support either of yours.  Love to you both and wishes for a smooth next couple of days- you are always in my thoughts. 