So those of you have have been reading my blog know, I am moving.

The move in question is being done in several stages.  Well last Saturday was one of those BIG stages.  A moving truck and removing much of the boxes and furniture.

It did not go as well as anticipated.

One, I was not ready, all the boxes that needed to be packed and ready to go were not all packed.  My daughter also did a lot of last minute packing.

Two, many of the people we were hoping and somewhat counting on did not show up, (but 4 who were not expected did help and that was a huge thing).  Those that did show up worked very very hard and helped a lot.  I appreciate that massively.

That morning, faced with all the stuff that was not done and ready, all the people who were not showing up, I had I was having a panic attack / meltdown.

We were only able to do 1.5 loads rather than two full loads because we ran out of people and energy.  So more stuff to put in my car and bring over.

My daughter is now in the new house with A lot to do.  The stove and fridge had been left dirty, and a friend cleaned it, but there is a lot of cleaning needed before unpacking and placing our furniture.

The old house still has a lot of work to do, maybe too much.  The good part (???) is that I am having trouble sleeping, so that gives me a little more time to do stuff.  I've been going to bed around midnight and getting up no later than 6 or so.  This does give me an extra 2-3 hours a day.  More folding, cleaning and packing can be done.

The landlord is having the unit visited to rent on the first of next month and there is pressuring to vacate early as there are repairs to be done.  I am paid till the end of the month, I am taking till the end of the month.

I got pretty angry last week.  The landlord had called to have the place visited on the Thursday (rather than the agreed Monday) and we tried to get the place presentable as it was 2 days to the move and we had not been focusing on the presentable part, we were planning on doing that Sunday.  So we worked on the cleaning rather than packing.  When he called to cancel the showing as he was sick, we stopped cleaning.  HE SENT THE PEOPLE TO VISIT ANYWAY!

I was beside myself, but not much I could do.  I did mention my landlord's bad track record at making repairs... but that's all.  The city inspector came and said the mold was dry, so non toxic but also called the landlord to tell him he needed to fix it.

Well it's posted, people will keep coming even though  he has several other EMPTY properties being offered.

But that is life, these interruptions are only delaying my actual leaving...  Sometimes I think it's unfair to compare me with other people because my Karma or whatever you call it make me different from other people.  Having so many people cancel at the last minute is definitely not what others go through, the various traumas, disabilities, everything is not what the average person goes through.  When trying to help or treat me or my son, my Karma really should be taken more into consideration

Thanks for reading.