Hello everyone!
Life seems to get away from me.

Even though I do very little, since I have been back at work part-time, it feels like I don't have time for anything anymore, including coming here to write about what is going on.

Work has been busy and making me pretty tired, I have a hard time doing my four hour shift, I can't imagine when soon I will start being full-time.  When I get home, I don't want to do anything.  I am getting behind in my housework...

I have been continuing my therapies.  So far I don't know that they are working.

My foster cats are not getting adopted, in fact one of my cats is still fighting with one of the fosters so I have to keep him isolated.  The fosters that I have currently are Pepsi, Sylver and Valentine.  I have had some visitors but no takers.

As for finances - UGH!
Why do things have to be do  complicated, so difficult?

My pays have had some clawbacks for vacation time I took that I was not entitled to get, making my part-time pay much lower than it would have been.  Also there was some mistake done with my insurance so I was not covered for January so I am much poorer than when I was on EI, especially considering the extra expenses involved with working like gas and parking...  The house is almost out of food.

I have been working with getting the mistakes with my insurance corrected and hopefully it will work.  The mistake is that someone from my compensation department does not know the difference between last day paid and last day actually worked.  That made a difference of 3 weeks!  Delaying my coverage from 3 weeks.   Considering the clawbacks on my pay meaning I could have qualified for extra EI had we known but now I just have to somehow cope with less money.

Why do things need to be so complicated? So difficult? So confusing?  Why can't things just be simple, easy?

I keep thinking of how things could be so much worst.  Some people have it much worst so I have to keep reminding myself of that.


Thanks for reading and sorry for unloading.
You might also like:
Wind Mobile - The Saga Continues
Life Goes On
Broken mirror???
Linkwithin