So I am getting pretty desperate here.  I want to have a clone or two of myself, but not of now, of when I was 27 or so.

This move is going to happen but it will kill me.

Well kill may be an overstatement.

I can't wait until we are in the new house and nothing is left to do in the old house (i.e. February)

I know a lot will be lost (like the stuff outside that is frozen to the ground, it is very cold in Canada right now) but at least it will be over.

OK not quite as unpacking, cleaning and painting will still need to be done, but there will not be an urgency for that part, I can take years to complete it if necessary.

Now there is an urgency and all my possessions have to be removed from the old house by a certain date.  Cleaning and possibly painting also has to be done by that date.

Trust me the magnitude of the necessary work is massively daunting for a person with Fibromyalgia who has a sprained (yes still) ankle.

The reason the ankle is still sprained is that full recovery keeps getting post-poned by mini sprains which keep occurring.  Now I think I have developed something called Anterior Ankle Impingement  (well maybe not, but the pain is similar)  Makes negotiating stairs very difficult. 

This is further complicated by the fact that the stress is making my heart rate go a bazillion miles per minute and I am always out of breath, this need to keep going up and down the stairs is totally exhausting me.


Now I think I am in what is termed as a "crash" in Fibroworld. Crash is where you fall apart. Maybe it happens just as the last guest is leaving; maybe it happens just as the turkey gets carved. You CRASH and loose all sense of reason. Sometimes it's a long crash, like sliding your face 50 ft. across a gravel road before you come to a complete stop.

Then you burn, or Flare; sometimes for days. You feel like you're coming down with the flu, your muscles ache beyond reason and you are completely unfit for company. Lock the door and throw away the key.

But in my situation I can't stop, I can't rest, there is too much to do, too little time. 

I have to keep going to work, I have to keep packing and cleaning.  I don't know what I will do on moving day.  I just do 2 carloads WITH help, not even having to carry things up and down stairs and I can barely handle it.

As I write this I am so tired, in so much pain, but only 1/2 of my day is done.  My hands and feet are swollen.  I still have 30 minutes before going home.  I feel like I am in the middle of a serious flu.  I am freezing, then sweating, I sneeze, my throat is sore.

I know this sounds like a whine fest.  Yes I am whining....

Maybe tonight I will take a long hot bath then go to bed rather than do what I am supposed to do.

Maybe taking tonight off will mean I can do move on moving day (this Saturday)  Maybe I will go take the bath in the NEW EXTRA DEEP bathtub for full effect

Soak the aches and pains away.  Then rest.  Maybe I will take off work early tomorrow to catch up on the missed last minute packing.

Maybe, we'll see.

Thanks for reading.