People with medical conditions often struggle with this question, especially at work, should they tell their manager, boss, supervisor or not.

Those with visible conditions don't have a choice, but 'invisible" conditions such as Bipolar, Fibromyalgia or Chronic Fatigue (and many more I am sure) struggle with the choice.

Medical conditions are private things.  Also, depending on the condition, there can be stigmas attached to them.  Workplace mentality may also be in important factor on whether to disclose or not.  Does your medical condition affect you ability to do your job?  How will your place of employment view any potential limitation, will disclosure risk your employment?

I feel that the details of my medical conditions are on a need to know basis, even though I have nothing to hide.  However, it took me five (5) years to tell my boss about my condition, to actually let him know I was sick, not just sometimes but all the time.  In fact I just told him.

I did not want my manager to judge me solely on my medical condition, I did not want to take advantage of anything either.  I wanted to be judged solely on my abilities and NOT my dis-abilities.  There came a point however where I just could no longer quite hide my conditions, and even though I wanted very much to function at 100%, I just could not.  Now my manager has now known me for a while and he knows my abilities.

He was surprised.  When he found out what my conditions were he was surprised. I am sure that when he has a better chance to think about it, and maybe do a bit of research things will very likely click into place for him.  Of course I did not go into deep details, the information I gave him was all high level.  I am lucky, I work for an employer who is very accommodating.  Maybe sometimes too accommodating, but that is a question for another post.

For some advice, a great article was written about this subject, but either way it is a very difficult decision to make.  Many have had a negative experience with disclosure.  I am nervous, I hope this does not come back and hit me in the ass.


Thanks for reading!

You might also like:
Bipolar - NOS and New Treatement
Keep on working.
Depression is a Choice
Linkwithin