Hey guys, guess what!!!!


Almost Hallowe'en, my most favoritest day of the year!!!!!


For most of my adult life, I have wanted to make my house into a haunted house....


But that means a whole bunch of strangers trampling through your house...


That also means a lot of cleaning, before and after... (I hate cleaning)


So probably not going to have a haunted house any time soon BUT I do a scary front yard!


Only been able to do a scary front yard since oh about 2005, and still we slowly had to build it as we did not have a lot of decorations the first two years....


But even those first two years, the children (and parents enjoyed).


Also, keep in mind I live in a town home, the front yard is not that huge, but it will still have tombstones, bones, skeleton, ghouls, a body part or two, spider webs, strobe lights, fog, eerie sounds and carved pumpkins.


Remind me to add a picture once the decorations are done, mind you at night, with the strobe lights and fog, it would be better, BUT pictures are not always very good at night with strobe lights, maybe a video....


Daughter arranging the spider webs


Trying to escape to safety







We will be dressed (except my son who will be out trick or treating) in "scary costumes".


Speaking of costumes, I have recently tried to remember all the costumes my kids have had over the years


1992 -  My daughter was a foetus.... (Born 27 days later  LOL)
1993 -  Red Riding Hood (Made the cape myself from some scrap fabric my neighbour had given me)
1994-   A scarecrow (Made myself from 2nd hand clothes and scraps of fabric, got lots of compliments, I so wish I had a picture...)
1995 -  A black and white puppy with face painting (hand made costume given to me)
1996 -  A white and blue clown
1997 -  My daughter was Glenda (Wizard of Oz fairy  that I made myself)  
1998 -  Daughter was Sailor Moon, Son was Banana in Pajama (2) I was "The Crow"
1999 -  Daughter Batman? Son ?
2000 -  Daughter Squaw  Son a Bear
2001 -  Daughter Purple Witch,  Son Clown costume recycled
2002 -  Daughter  Purple Witch Son Puppy costume his sister wore
2003 -  Daughter  ??                            Son ??
2004 -  Daughter  Baby                       Son a Devil                                                    
2005 -  Daughter  Geisha                 Son a Dinosaur
2006 -  Daughter  Pink Fairy  Son  a Dementor                             Me, Witch
2007 -  Cancelled        
2008 -  Daughter Witch,                     Son   a Female Rock Star                     Me, Devild's mistress
2009 - Daughter  Shaman  Son "The Love Guru"         
2010 -  Daughter  Witch             Son Murderous clown            
2011 -  Daughter a Goth fairy Son  Neo from the Matrix               Me  an evil Jester




We did skip Halloween for two years, one where I "cancelled" Hallowe'en as a result of the kids pushing their luck too far behaviour wise (they never thought I would do it)


Another year our finances would not let us, but I think we still had costumes for the year.



We have also become quite creative with our pumpkin carving,



It's unfortunate that Halloween falls on a Monday this year...  But we should be able to have fun none the less, we are having a small decorating get together....


Well I'll try to remember to let you all know how it turns out.








Thanks for reading!