I have been posting much lately.

I know my last post was looking hopeful.  A new direction.

I have to say I have yet to do nay of the projects mentioned.  Something has always been in the way.

I am struggling.  Mentally, physically.and financially.

Last week, we did clean up the front yard.  It is looking a bit better.  We still need to place the pavers around the tree and the front flower beds.  We took out the fairy stuff.  Make it look like it's mine.



We also started some seeds going.  I know I am a little late, but it's not May yet so, I might have some produce this summer yet. Assuming the seeds grow.

Trying to figure out how to get the backyard garden going.  There is a lot of soil needed,  Also some kind of barrier.  I have decided I want a berry bush.  Of course it's a big expense at first BUT in the long run it will save money.  If not this year, definitely by next year.



Also, there is nothing like having fresh produce, grown without all those chemicals and growth hormones.

BTW, I sorely miss being able to do stuff, whenever I got the hankering.  I miss taking a walk to the store.  I miss being able to do all the manual labour I used to do.  Believe it or not, I enjoyed most of that work.

Hard to enjoy stuff when it hurts so much.  I am sorry. I should not keep talking about this.

I should not mention that my cubital tunnel is acting up again.  I should not mention that I now have this new itch/burn thing going with my fingers and toes.  I should not mention that my accommodation at work is moving at a very slow pace.  I should not mention that as I sit here typing today I just want to cry from the pain.  I took pain relievers but it not taking the pain away.  I hate knowing there is nothing I can do.  Nothing anyone can do.

I hate not being able to just enjoy life.

Oh boy, whining again.  Sorry.

Back to the garden. assuming that my finances enable me to get the basics done this year.  We are trying to start some veggies from seeds.  So far we have planted peas, yellow wax beans, cucumbers, tomatoes and lettuce.

Yup fresh garden.  We still have the parley and thyme from last year.  They just need to be replanted properly.  We will need to get some more perennial spices.  Basil sounds like a good plan.  Oregano too.

Can you imagine the nice pasta sauce we can have?  Yum yum.

As for flowers in the front, I have some bleeding hearts, some irises, some lilies to start.  May 2-4 weekend I'll see what else I can add.  Maybe I can buy more mini roses.  Those are always nice.

The soil we have at the new house is not like the one we had at the old house.  It's kinda dry and "sandy"  The old soil was moist and clumpy.  I wonder if the plants will grow as well in this type of soil.  I probably should get some compost or something to enrich it, help it keep it's moisture.  On the other hand, maybe this means less of those pesky bugs.

I bought three hooks last year.  I decided that this year I would use them as bird house holders.  Get some of those cute ones from Dollarama.

I have also started using my slow cooker (crock pot).  Last weekend I tried out a Jambalaya recipe.  This is very definitely a great thing.  I just have to get a little better at the recipes, shopping for them and prepping them either the night before or even better during the weekend, create baggies of ready meals, just plunk in slow cooker in morning.  Can you imagine using the slow cooker to make pasta sauce, using fresh tomatoes and  fresh spices?  The smell when you come home after a day's work?  The challenge would be to make sure I get some as the kids get home before I do and it just make qualify as cruel and unusual punishment to not let them have any while continuing to smell it.  Bad enough when I use the slow cooker during the weekend (as for the jambalaya).

I don't know that there is much else that is new.  The house has not moved forward in anything, no painting, no more boxes disappearing.  It just is.  I have fishes that keep dying, things that keep getting lost.  The usual.

Well thanks for reading and till next time!