You know this place, as my first post explains, is supposed to be a place where I can let loose.

But this is a public forum, all kinds of people will probably wind up reading these things that I write, even people I know!

It looks like that means that I will need to start censuring what I say.  Or does it?

I can't afford therapy, and the waiting list for those less expensive help places have waiting lists coming out the whazoo.  I also have a really hard time being accepted to those services.

Add to that, all the therapists I have seen thus far have not been very helpful. They can't even touch the tip of the iceberg that is me, they totally bungle all attempts and in many cases, have done more harm than good.  What good is a therapist if they can't get their patient to open up?

I have a laundry list of issues, some are probably joined at the hip, a few may have the same source, in some cases, the problem may be more chemical that psychological.

I created this blog to try and release my inner demons, and sometimes that might mean saying things that may offend.  Keeping everything in is just not working for me.  I have a very low tolerance level for a lot of things.  I realize I need to work on that and can't just use it as an excuse, but it NEEDS TO COME OUT!

So do I need to censure myself if I share a story about one of my readers?  I don't plan on naming names... Just this one person did this or said that.  If I don't give a name, or an address, is it still "slander"?  Do I need to be muzzled again?

If I write about something that annoyed me, like I ask a question and the person who responds to me probably didn't get the question right because their answer was totally off base, will that be going too far?  Heavens knows it doesn't take much to send me on a rant sometimes.  If that person happens to read my blog and recognize themselves, will they get mortally insulted or maybe learn a lesson?  How would I feel if the roles were reversed?





How would I feel?  Good question!

Well I guess how I would feel would all depend on the circumstance.


Have I been forewarned that I may be ridiculed online? If I was I have a few choices:

1. Not do anything that may cause me to be ridiculed - OK that is impossible! Something always invariably happens, something stupid will come out of my mouth without warning, and to top it off, I am not the most "regular" person out there, so that is not going to happen.  However I could choose to be a little more careful about the things I do or say.

2. Ask the person to not write about me.  NO!!! As much as I would like to do that, I don't think it's good to muzzle people.  It hurts them on such a deep and basic level that I could not do that.  If they need to say mean things about me, I may not like it, but it's something that I would have to deal with.  Hopefully it's warranted and I may learn something from the whole thing.

3. I could simply choose not to read it.  If I have a good relationship with the blogger I could ask the blogger to tell me when there is a post about me, that way I can choose to read it or not.  If I choose to read it, no matter what is written there, I cannot get all huffy about it.  If I disagree, I can respectfully choose to discuss it with the blogger or just learn to live with it.

What if I was not forewarned?

Well the same three choices above apply right?  Sure there is the option of being hurt and insulted.  If it happens to me I may do those two things as well.  I think that part of me will have to accept that negatives things will be said and thought about me in any forum, and all of them are public in one way or another.

So I will not censure myself, I will share what I think and feel.  I will try to not name names, or give too much distinctive information that EVERYONE can figure out...  but I will rant and rave about the things that spark me.


Thanks for reading!

Feel free to comment (I fixed the comment options)