So payday came and went without any deposit of any kind in my bank account.  I was expecting to have a deposit of 3 days, my last deposit from work but that did not happen.

I tried to log in to My Service Canada Account, they changed the login credentials and do not recognize my server as being secure. I wanted to find out the status of my claim for EI as my work was finally supposed to send in my forms.  So I called the toll free number and find out that they have not received my forms yet and my application timed out.  I must now go to a local centre to start it back up again, I hope this does not cause too many delays as according to my form I received a pay this week (but didn't)

So a little stressed out.  I have my line of credit to pay my mortgage and I did buy enough food to last a month or two so we are OK for now, but not for long.

Also, I am still awaiting my insurance reimbursement for my oral surgery.I hope to get it before a LOC payment is due.

My son's laptop finally died.  The same day (or the next, not sure) he finds an old laptop in the garbage.   which he was able to upgrade.  This laptop, even though it has it's share of problem is better than his former Laptop.

 I've been filling out insurance papers for assistance once the waiting period is due.  I will need to send a copy to my family physician as well as something for my psychiatrist. Of course I will need to pay each doctor to fill out the form, unless my family doctor can get the information from my psychiatrist he needs to discuss previous sick leaves.  They are asking for medical history for the last 5 years .

Shit I can't even remember what I did yesterday!  Also they want to know when my symptoms first appeared.  With chronic conditions like mine, that's a little tough so I decided to go with when they got worst.

3 years ago when I quit smoking.  I was having problems before that but that's when things spiraled and never got back.

These papers are for income replacement is either my leave gets prolonged OR for my progressive return to work.

Speaking of return to work, I went to see my psychiatrist yesterday.  She was discussing that I return to work now at 4 days a week.

SHIIITTTTT!

WTF!

Pardon my language!

I want help, I need help.  Flipping at her would not have been acceptable but  is it too much to ask that she be aware of my case when we see each other?

I know she has a lot of clients.  She can't remember all of them.  I know that, but maybe she can have some kind of quick notes that she reads and adjusts as needed to read before she sees a client?

She has receive reports from two sources that I am not bipolar, yet she keeps trying to treat my conditions as such.  She has received reports of suggested treatments but ignores them (anti-depressants).  She's got reports from 3 sources that I have issues with my eating and physical appearance but prescribes stuff that makes me gain weight, putting me at risk of a relapse.

She also forgets that she is not the one that put me on sick leave.  That was the Health Canada doctor and my family physician.  My sick leave has much more to do than me being bipolar...

I accepted the sacrifices needed to get better, I can't go back now before I start getting better, before therapy and rheumatologist  have begun.  If I go back now before anything happens, I lost income and my parking at work for nothing.  I lost all my vacation days and sick leave for nothing.  I will only go back to spiral at a greater speed.

For her to suggest I return to work now, at 4 days a week with my social phobia in full swing, to a job in client services, how can she keep her license?

Well that is it for now,

Thanks for reading, as always.