Let`s play pretend....

Let's pretend, you have not slept in two days and you have developed the flu.

You aren`t sneezy or coughy, not do you have a fever but you are exhausted, aching all over.

With me so far?

OK.  So you are feeling pretty crappy right?  OK, well it's raining outside and you absolutely have to go to the corner store to get something... you pick.

As you are crossing the street, you get hit by a car...


Luckily, nothing is broken... just bruised everywhere and really hurting.  You are probably hurting more than you have ever hurt in your life.  Every movement is excruciating.  You just want some drugs to dull the pain...

Right????

You probably just want to lie there and not do much.

Now pretend you have this guy, you are totally in love with.  Things are going well and you expect him to pop the question any day now.

Now imagine that while you are lying there in pain you get a call from a mystery woman. She is your "boyfriend"'s new wife.  She is pregnant and they are expecting a child together.  She informs you that he will no longer be seeing you.  To make it believable she sends you picture of the wedding and of him kissing her belly.

Now how do you feel?

Exhausted, hurting all over and probably pretty depressed right?

This has to feel really really awful.  Right?

Now imagine that you try to turn to someone, and they tell you to just stop being negative...  That MUST feel great right?


You with me so far???


OK!


Now you have a pretty good idea how I feel.


Now imagine having to take care of an autistic violent totally entitled child feeling this way.  Imagine asking for help and constantly being turned down.

Feel any better?


Probably not.

Now how would you feel about going to work?  Is there any chance that you would like any job you went to?  Is there any chance you would be motivated?  Probably not, but it doesn't matter you have to go to work every day.

Welcome to my world.

I know I must be positive, be cheerful, be good humoured.  I must be stable, not cause scenes, not complain.

Good thing will happen if I just stay positive.  It's so friggin hard sometimes.

Well thanks for stopping by.