A few months ago, I decided to switch Internet and phone provider (land line).

I felt that I was paying way too much with the provider I had been with up till then.

I researched companies online and decided to go with Teksavvy.  I placed an order for both services on their website, including the fact that I wanted to port over my current phone number.

They claimed on their website that if porting over your number, you would not be charged regular installation fees.

You are charged with a new number though.  They emailed me saying that there would be a delay of a week for the Internet as they had to activate the phone service first.  They confirmed dates.

On the date in question the technician never came to my home, even though we had taken time off work to wait for him.

According to several calls and emails to Teksavvy everything was up and running but I was still getting my calls on my phone number through my cable company and the Internet was not working on the date they said it would.  On that date, no technician came to the house either.

Follow a series of emails and calls with them saying that yes everything was up and running and my saying that no it is not.  They said that if my house was not connected I would have to have a technician come and connect at my own charge. (Contrary to what they advertised)

Eventually we figured out a few things (after about a month)...

They had given me a new number and not ported my number over.  They were calling me on my old number but had given me a new number.

Because they made a mistake in my activation order, it explained why no technician had ever come to my house.  It explained why they wanted me to pay for the connection fees to transfer from cable service to "Bell" service. Once they figured out the problem, they informed me that it would take another month to activate me properly and I would be credited what I had already paid.
To boot, they charged me for a dry loop (which was eventually credited) to activate the DSL on my active phone line.

The delay to have my phone and Internet switched over was a full month for which Teksavvy billed me.  With Teksavvy it works by advance billing.

I expected that my first month would be taken care of as I had paid the month where I had no service and I had been told that what I had already paid would cover me.

I was shocked to receive another bill.  I call and ask why I am being billed.  They say that I have to pay for the new month.  I explain that I have already paid.  I give her the full spiel of what had happened and the names and case numbers of the people I had spoken to.  Eventually she saw that I was supposed to have a credit but told me that to have my service activated I had to pay this bill.

I wanted my service activated as I had cancelled my previous service provider. (I had not cancelled them initially which enabled me to still have a phone and Internet during this whole debacle.  Which is a good thing as I would have been without phone or Internet and fixing the problem might have been a lot more difficult.)

So to this day I have not been credited that month.  I am still 77$ in the hole.

Also, My high speed DSL from TekSavvy is slow as molasses.  I recall my Internet which was one notch up from dial up in 2002 being the same speed.

They say you get what you pay for.

With Teksavvy, that is definitely the case.


Thanks for reading.