I was reminded recently that I had a much better life than my daughter at the same age.

For the most part, I cannot disagree.

By comparison, my daughter did not have it anywhere near as easy.

 
Me  Daughter
I had both parents and we were far from poor.  We lived a luxurious life. Her dad was not there, her mom (me) was poor.  Not just poor, dirt poor.
My mom pretty much knew what she was doing, she had two kids before me and many younger siblings before that. Her mom (me) did not really know what she (I) was doing, I was the baby of the family and my daughter  was my first.
I lived in three houses until I was 18, went to 2 schools.  Quite stable My daughter by the age of 18 had lived in a total of 10 places,  and went to 8 schools. Quite unstable.
We lived in a nice house with a large back yard.  It was a village so there were very little dangers and almost everything was within walking distance.  Most were appartments, with no yard, some were quite small (1 bedroom with 2 kids).  Lived in cities and towns far from everything. 
I had access to an arena and a lake.  Little access to recreation. (well there was this water park they liked for 2 years)
 I had stable older brothers (Baby)  She has an unstable younger brother (Eldest)
 I got bullied  She got bullied
 I was very protected  She suffered severe trauma
 I rarely accessed my relatives  She saw her relatives on a regular basis
 I did sports a plenty, band in high-school  She did not do sports, she did do a bit of music and cadets.
 Travelled very little but did a lot of car rides around town  Travelled very little but did a lot of car rides in Ottawa area
 I had a stay at home mom  Her mom (me) worked almost all the time, even shift work and weekends.
 Was allowed to have a boyfriend at 11  Was also allowed to have a boyfriend at 11
 Kicked out of house when just 18  Still living at home at 19
 Had to pay for all my studies  Mom paid for 1rst year university, helped with second
 Mom skipped graduation from high-school  Mom went to highschool graduation
 Mom skipped college graduation, so did I  Mom has NO INTENTION of skipping university graduation
 Mom attended some games/ shows but not all.  Mom skipped some shows (tulip festival) but not all
 Went camping a few times Rarely went camping
 Did not visit museums  Visited museums regularly
 Went shopping often (Malls)  Went shopping often (Second hand stores)

There are so many more comparisons that can be made between the two of us, but indeed, I did generally have the better childhood (0 to 16).  I hope to make up for it by making sure she has a better young adulthood (16 to 25).

Not an easy task with my disabilities and her brother.
Wish me luck

And thanks for reading.
You might also like:
My views on Single Parenthood
Another dream reached.
Parenting tricks
Linkwithin