I am having trouble with Blogger, where I can't seem to compose with the regular "composer" and HTML doesn't do paragraphs unless I know the code for it. I'll come fix it later when it seems to cooperate better.

Hello all,

I started this post several months ago but have never felt inspired to come and complete it.

Did I mention in a previous post that last year around this time I hit a Huge Pothole? Well ever since that time I have developed a fear of driving. It was mild at first, I'd just be afraid that my car was defective as a result of hitting that pothole. Eventually I went to have it checked and what needed fixing was fixed.

Yet the fear did not go away.

It progressively got worst. I know that in a previous post I discussed some peeves I had in regards to other drivers, well some of those peeves have developed into fears. I am no longer just afraid of bicycles and bikes but of every vehicle on the road. I am also afraid of every pedestrian that walks on the sidewalk.

I am afraid of my car breaking down or suddenly catching fire.
I am afraid of ice and snow.
I am afraid of skidding or hitting something or someone.  Or maybe just getting into an accident by skidding off the road or getting into a rollover.
I am afraid of tow trucks in front of me loosing their load or any type of truck really.
I am afraid of something malfunctioning with the tethers in other load baring vehicles.

 If you can think of it, I am afraid of it.

Just this morning I almost had a collision.  I was driving in a lane and someonedecided to turn into my lane RIGHT WHERE I WAS!.  It's a good thing there was nobody in the other lane as I was able to vear into it at the last minute to avoid a collision.  He either did not look properly or well, there are no other excuses really.  Had I not been able to vear into the next lane he would have hit me, that is how close I was to a collision.  It's not that he was cutting me off and I had to slow down, or that he was trying to come in behind me, there was enough speed to hit me.  This was right near my home, the rest of the drive in to work I was raw nerves.
I have discussed it with a therapist but since I am still driving I don't think they have taken this fear seriously.

Yes I am still driving, with my heart in my throat every single time, on the verge of hyperventilation from shear panic but yes I am still driving.  I hear that if I stop it will only get worst.

Last week I spoke to my psychiatrist about it, told her I had severe anxiety while driving and that I wanted to find a way to stop being so afraid.

She said she would refer me to an anxiety program but didn't know if and when I would be accepted.

To think that a bad pothole started all of this.  Amazing.

Do any of you have any suggestions for me?

Thanks for reading!