I went to Petcetera today and purchased two sample bags at 2.99.  I foster cats and kittens so I like these bags so I can give them to the new home for the kittens and I get a 3.00 coupon.

 These sample bags come with a free can.  For the second time, Petcetera has charged me for the accompanying cans.  Last time I realized it when I got home and refused to spend 2-3 dollars in gas to go back and get a refund, this time I checked before leaving the parking lot.  When I saw I had been charged again I went back in and initially, the store clerk and manager refuse to either reimburse me or give me the free cans.  It was processed in the system it was too late.  After much complaining and insisting they accepted to "cancel the purchase" and re- purchase the two bags, refunding my debit card and recharging it (costing me 35cent per transaction mind you).

I wrote to both companies, Royal Canin and Petcetera the same day I came home from the second time.

Well I am happy to say that Royal Canin got in touch with me within the week to find out which Petecetera had been charging me for the cans and giving me a hard time about it.  They plan on contacting the store to explain the situation.

No other form of compensation was offered so whatever.  It's a nice thought but it doesn't give me the free cans I am owed, not does it change how I was treated.

Petcetera on the other hand has not gotten in touch with me at all.  No reaction from them at all about my bad experiences in their store.  Total ignorance.

Petecetera may have some good deals, but I have comparison shopped and many of their other items are double to triple the prices of others stores. 

Since they do not bother to contact and say anything regarding this incident, I definitely will stop spending my gas to go to their store when I have other stores I can walk to.

They lost THIS client and I hope many more.
You might also like:
Living With the Bipolar Label.
Visit to the Emergency.
Do you believe in ghosts?
Linkwithin