We moved in this house in 2005.

When we moved in this house, our landlord had the bathtub changed.  They forgot to seal the overflow drain...

So we moved in and with my love of baths, I took my usual extra full soaks.  After a few, we noticed that water was leaking in the basement (the bathtub was on the first level) when I took my bath.

We realized that then that the overflow was not sealed and the water was flowing into the walls, down the main floor to the basement.

The wall it flowed down was the wall joining the kitchen with the living room.

We contacted the landlord and even though workers came to do some repairs, the bathtub was not sealed.  Tired of waiting, we eventually sealed the overflow drain ourselves.

A few months later (Around Xmas) we noticed that there was mold on the wall and ceiling in the kitchen.

Again we contacted the landlord to mention a list of things needing repairs.  Workers came and did some weather stripping but did not look into the mold in the walls.  We asked a few times then gave up.






As some of you know, I recently bought a house, so I will be moving shortly.  I mentioned that I hope the landlord would finally fix the mold issue before renting to new tenants.  A friend mentioned that it was not wonder I was sick if I had been living with mold for several years.

So I decided to look into this whole mold thing...


Regarding the symptoms of black mold poisoning, you do not have to have all of them, if you've been exposed to toxic black mold. You may have just one or two symptoms.  Most people with significant exposure to toxic mold have more than two or three symptoms. They usually have 10 to 15!
muscle pain, cramps, burning, unusual shooting (ice pick-like) pains
headaches
fatigue, weakness, flu-like symptoms, fever, chills
shortness of breath, cough
abdominal pain, diarrhea
chronic sinusitis, sore throat
burning eyes, red eyes, sensitivity to light
difficulty with thought processes, memory loss, loss of concentration, confusion, disorientation, “brain fog”
dizziness, balance problems
metallic taste in mouth
numbness and tingling
night sweats
temperature regulation problems
excessive thirst and urination
rash
excessive menstrual bleeding
mylar flush (face flushing)…. I had this…people thought I looked healthy because of it.
chest pains
IgA nephropathy (kidney disease)
Increased infections
Less Common Symptoms of Black Mold Poisoning

The sensation that you are going to pass out
Panic attacks
Tremors
Attention deficit disorder
Vision problems
Swollen lymph nodes
Anxiety, depression
Difficulty losing weight (in detoxifier types)
Ringing in the ears
Hearing loss
Chronic fatigue
Multiple chemical sensitivity (stachybotrys and chaetomium)
Nose bleeds and pulmonary hemorrhaging (stachybotrys)
Bruising, hives
Infertility, miscarriage
Fibromyalgia
Chronic fatigue
Multiple sclerosis like symptoms
Dirt like taste in mouth
Cancer
Hair loss
Joint pains
Irregular heart beat
Heart attack
Seizure
Muscle twitching
Anaphylaxis on re-exposure to toxic molds
Air hunger, can’t get a deep breath
Child development delays
Lateness
Apathy
Difficulty handling any kind of stress
Mood swings, irritability
Frequent upper respiratory infections
Sensitivity to sound
Nausea, vomiting
New food allergies
Jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes)
Poor insight into illness
Stomach ulcers
Now as you all know, I have CFS and FMS....
It started getting bad about a year after I had moved into this home (so about a year after exposure to this mold?) and has gotten progressively worst.  I think if you read some of my past posts, you will see that I have MANY of the symptoms above...  I don't know if I mentioned I am always out of breath but definitely another to add to the list...

I have noticed that both of my kids are always tired and low energy, I have often wondered if what I have was not somehow genetic, and if so, why were they already affected, when I really only got hit in my 30's.

They also are both prone to dizzy spells and  (especially my daughter). 

My daughter also has:

chronic sinusitis 
dizziness and balance problems
almost passes out...
temperature regulation problems
increased infections
chronic headaches
nose bleeds
mood swings
new food allergies
nausea
My son :

dizziness and balance problems
temperature regulation problems
chronic headaches
mood swings
anxiety
developmental delays
chest pains
just to name a few of the symptoms that have appeared in the last 5 years...


So now I can't help but wonder... maybe the mold should be tested....

I have asked for a city inspector's opinion...


What do you think?


Thanks for reading....