Recently we have had snow just as spring was starting.  A lot of snow for just the start of spring and it brought to mind some peeves I have.

The main peeve is people not clearing the snow off their cars!

How hard is it to clear the snow off your car people?

Do you not realize that not clearing the snow off your car is not only a hazard for yourself, it's also a hazard for the people around you as the blowing snowing coming off your car can cause some visibility problems for the people driving behind you.

It takes just a few minutes to brush off the snow at most.  Why take the chance?

Another peeve is tailgating.

If you always have to brake while the person in front of you does not, it's a sign you are either following too close or going too fast.  Yes I get it that the person in front of you may be going too slow, but tailgating is not the solution.  If the person in front of you has to brake suddely for something you did not see because you were just following too close, are you sure you have the time to brake as well?  I admit having someone right in my rear end makes me nervous, but will not make me speed just to satisfy their need for speed.  For the record, I am not a "slow" driver.

Also is it just me or have today's drivers gotten more reckless and impatient?

I don't think I have ever heard so many horns blasting (and no not just at me).  I know I drive more carefully, I take more time merging and such, I want to be safe but seriously?  Pressing on the gas angrily because I chose to drive safely is doing no one any favours.

I see more slaloming as well.  Do you really get to where you are going that much faster?  Doesn't being stopped by a cop for a ticket slow you down much more than taking your time?  Doesn't being involved in an accident delay you?

I am not a horrible driver nor an overly cautious one.  I am a regular run of the mill driver.  There are a lot worst than me out there, I just don't drive "stupid".  I use to love going out for a drive but now, at times it scares me because of those that drive so aggressively and with so little disregard for other drivers.

I took courses to allow me to drive in the worst of weathers as well as for high speed.  But none of those courses can save me from a driver that takes their own safety for granted.  A car is a killing machine.  It kills more people every day than guns.  It seems like people forget that.

Well that is my two cents worst.  Be safe out there.

Thanks for reading.
You might also like:
Being careful.
Pet Peeves, or Things That Annoy Me
Visit to the Emergency.
Linkwithin