I hate thieves

I really really really hate thieves

Oh I abhor them, I abhor them with the passion of 11 suns.

Thieves are the absolute scum of the earth.  You can usually gain so much more from asking than thieving.

Over the years My kids and I have been targets of thieves on several occasions and it's nice to say: "Well you should have been more careful with your things!"  but ultimately, it was those who stole who are responsible.

There would be no need to behave like paranoids over everything is people could just leave alone stuff that does not belong to them.


Seriously!

The following is stuff the kids and I have had stolen over the years   ~~~ but not all as I can't think of Everything.

My daughter:

Babysitting money of about $ 500 that she had saved to buy herself a game system and the balance was to buy gifts for her loved ones. At Walmart, she stopped to take off her coat, put down her purse and forgot it there for a few minutes.  When she went back the purse and money was gone.  I in her purse it had her school ID, showing that she was a kid (14 or 15).  The purse and money were never recovered.
A brand new bike she had just gotten a few days before it was stolen.  She had chosen this bike after years of old second hand bikes. It was on special and I had had a one time payout.  I could not afford to get another one.  (2 other bikes were also stolen that day)  The bikes were locked in our back yard.
My son is a little more careless than the rest of us so he has had more things stolen such as:

3 bikes (2 new and one second hand)  The two new bikes he had for less than a week each.  One of them was stolen at the same time as his sister's from our back yard.  The other two he left them unlocked.
A remote control truck.  He left it outside in front of our door after playing.  This truck was worth more than $ 100.  Within minutes it was gone.

Myself, I have had
 Turtles, live ones, I left them in a kiddy pool in the back yard, a pool they were unable to climb out of so they could get some sun and exercise.
Bikes
Money
Scooter was damaged, they tried to take it but were probably interrupted, a gas scooter

For many many years we were not a rich family.  These things were gifts were could not afford or that we had saved a very very long time to get.

It broke out hearts, damaged our souls.

Even today, even though I "make more money" we still can't afford much and have to work hard and save for any luxury. 

How can people hurt others this way?  How can they live with themselves?


Thanks for reading!