Hello all,

Just finished week number 4 of sick leave.  This means that I get no more sick days from work and will have to subsist on EI from now on.  It SCARES me!  I had 3 weeks of vacation/sick days from work.  I have one paycheck left coming for 3 days (rather than a full of 10 days) then my two weeks waiting not paid.... and last my EI.  I assume that I will get my first payment in December...  I am not ready.

So to not think about it, I am keeping myself as busy as I can.  I may even have lost weight out of it.  MAY
This was the early stage of decorations

We did Halloween.  Not as many kids as we had feared so that is good.  It was a mild Halloween.  Some took pictures so I am sure we will appear on the internet somewhere.  See this post with last year's pics

I have a few for this year:


We did Halloween.  Not as many kids as we had feared so that is good.  It was a mild Halloween.  Some took pictures so I am sure we will appear on the internet somewhere.  See this post with last year's pics

I have a few for this year:

Now I have 4 pumpkin to cook and freeze, 2 small, 2 larger.  Definitely will collect the seeds for roasting.











This post is however called the library.

See those padded photo album, done by me with the kids baby blankets...
I have had this simple dream to have one of those library offices in my home.  I dreamed of being surrounded by the books I love while writing my novels.

Well rather than writing novel it's a blog...  Plus I don't have the funds to make it as opulent as I desired but I started it with GORM shelves from IKEA and a few other shelves I had lying around. 

Of course, it's not finished   Can't leave all those wood colors so painting is required.  Then go though the house, grab most of the books and fill those shelves.  Well painting may come after or mid-way through.  Soon as I pick my color.

We do have enough books in the house to fill all these shelves.
 I should remember to post pictures once fully done
See those nice GORM shelves I had one at home but needed more so I bought 3 from one seller on Used Ottawa and  and 1 from another seller from Used Ottawa.  Well even though they were all GORM shelves they were all different!  These shelves come with only 4 levels and I needed more.  As you see below, I still managed to make it work!  HA! to you IKEA changing the models.!!!!

By the way this room used to be the guest bedroom.  I 
exchanged the two room last week  That room still has a way to go.  I have plenty to do around the house to keep myself busy another two months. Hopefully, before I go back to work, this place will be home.

Well thanks for reading.