For most of my adult life I was officially considered poor.  I mean my annual income one year was $13,000, with two kids...  we are talking poor here.


Up until about 5-6 years ago, my net income according to my taxes was under $32,000 every year.  


in 2001 I made $13,000
in 2002 I made $19, 000.  I got a "decent job" in July.  On this I paid child care for two kids...
in 2003 I made $28,000 Ditto child care


Child care, well that was between $2000 to $8000 a year, depending on the care provider and what I worked during the year.  MY mom babysat my kids for me one year, but I still gave her money for it, she needed that money.  You can't exactly leave you kids at home unsupervised when you are working, whether you can afford child care or not...  It could have been higher, but for a while I was paying only for one kid, since the eldest was latch key during my daytime shifts.


By 2005 I was making about $40,000 but supported not only my two kids but a friend and her kid.  Of course she had a bit of income, maybe $10,000? So a family of 5 on roughly $50,000, we were getting quite rich!  In a previous post I mentioned some of my ill financial luck (Tax fraud thing and other stuff which made life less lush...., see Murphy's Law)


Now, in 2011 I am, depending on the scale used, middle to high income.  I now wonder which is in fact better for me and my family.


If my income was under $30,000 still I would:

not be paying any taxes, or very little
be receiving close to maximum benefits for my son.  In regular benefits, (CCTB, CDB, NCBS  OCB) that amounts to $464 monthly or more)  Calculate yourself here.  
be receiving almost full benefits under ACSD funding (Assistance for children with severe disabilities) of about $400 monthly
qualify for all types of assistance for food and housing
qualify for support with my conditions as well.
my daughter would qualify for grants and loans for her post-secondary helping her pay for almost all her tuition
qualify for a quarterly GST/HST payment of approx $300
But I have worked very hard and sacrificed massively to raise myself above poverty level, I therefore:
pay a goodly amount of taxes
receive minimum or none of the many benefits for my son (CCTB, CDB,NCBS,OCB)
Receive minimum benefit under ACSD ($25 monthly)
do not qualify for any assistance for food or housing (I have to pay full price)
do not qualify for any support with my conditions (I have to pay full price)
my daughter qualified for no grants and a small loan for her post-secondary (Meaning I am expected to pay for it)
qualify for no GST/HST
Sure I can afford to pay for my daughter's tuition OR my son's special needs (braces, adaptive tools, meds) OR my special needs and treatment, but all three is quite the struggle.


So, I have been thinking of putting all of this in some Excel comparative sheet and look at what the bottom line is.  I am however afraid of the results.

I am afraid that it would show that all the sacrifices to get myself out of so-called poverty might have been for naught.  I am afraid that it might show that if I had taken the time to enjoy myself and my children I would not been any worst than I am now.

I have only named the top stuff that came out of my head, but in doing a detailed analysis, with all the services/benefits/taxes, all the stuff I am paying extra for for the privilege a having a "good job", it would show a truly accurate picture.

In the deepest of depression I have dealt with irate people being insulting and offensive.  People who have kicked and kicked until I was down.  I am afraid that a deep study might show that I didn't need to put up with all of it.

What do you think?


Well thanks for reading!