Hello All!


I wanted to let you all know what has been going on in my life lately, preventing me from posting as often as usual.

Oh I know I have managed to write up some ranting posts but that is not sharing like I usually do.  (Or is it?)

The first is that for the last month or so, I have been doing different kinds of stuff at work.  I started the second week of June.  It's an accommodation where I am interacting less with the public but doing more of other kinds of work.

I have written my blog during my breaks and yes sometimes during calls (mostly formatting during calls) but now the nature of my work makes it almost impossible to blog between 8-5.  Yes I still get breaks, but during the breaks I don;t feel much like typing and I often have other things to do to give my mind a rest.

I am in the process of being assessed for accommodation at work.  This is only a temporary assignment until a more permanent or long term solution can be found. At the same time I was hoping that this process would give my family doctor a better idea of the challenges I face everyday and might make him open to working with me to find something that works.

Unfortunately, everyone is focusing on the symptoms of my mind and no one is paying attention to the symptoms f my body.  There were a few close calls there but they did not delve enough and long enough to help long term.

So at work I can't post much.  At home I have another situation.  For the last week and a half, one of my foster kittens has been sick and required a lot of care.  I have been lucky in that my daughter has been helping me with some of his care while I am at work and at night (as I really need my sleep as you know).  This kitten (Bam Bam) has been taking a lot of my time and attention that my housework, and other past-times have been affected.


 Bam Bam has not been eating well, he's lost weight , we had managed to make him regain some and it was looking well, but he's stopped eating again.    His right eye has an infection that just does not seem to be going away.  You can't see it very well in the first two pictures  but see the 3rd picture.
The infection now seems to be spreading to his second eye.

We have been to the vet twice, he has had subcutaneous fluids once but has remained hydrated.  I have been taught to give the fluids just in case.

He is not as lethargic as he was the first few days.  He was even trying to play with my camera strap during the last picture so most of the pictures I took were blurry.

He is on metronidazole and the drug seems to keep him somewhat better than he was initially.

So Bam Bam :

was not eating, not it's hit and miss, we need to start "force feeding him every hour" again
was not drinking, but is drinking on his own now so I do not have to administer fluids
has mild diarrhea off and on
has thrown up but doesn't seem to be doing so now.  We are keeping a close eye on that.
was lethargic.  He still has less energy that the other kittens but is doing better.
Our other cats are feeling a little ignored and the fish and hamsters are definitely being ignored.

We fear that we may not save him, we hope we will.


Of course I have not been doing so well.  They asked me how recovered I was yesterday, I gave a grade of 4~5.  I figure 1 is coma, 10 is uber healthy.

So that's what's been going on.

Thanks for reading and hope to come back soon with better news.


http://photos.petfinder.com/photos/CA/ON/ON159/23644791/ON159.23644791-3-pn.jpg