There's these people who have this gift, this easiness to enjoy life.

I don't understand them, just like they don't understand me, (or us).

I get moments where I do enjoy life, so I have an idea of how it feels.  Feels pretty good to not be in  dark place for sure.  I'd like to be there all the time, in the light.

Just like those "happy people" do go to the dark place sometime.

The thing is, many happy people think that it's easy and simple to get out of the dark place, because it's easy for them.

Oh they will tell you that it's not easy for them, that they have to work at it, at being positive...

They deny that there is a basic difference in our psychological and biochemical make-up that make it just a little (LOT) more difficult for us to just pop out of our sadness.

Everybody has bad things that happen to them.  That is ABSOLUTELY TRUE!  Does every bad thing have the same "value"?  NO


Does the person who has had 5 bad little things happen to them equal the same as their neighbour who had 10 big bad things happen to them?  No, definitely not.  And sometimes the person who had the 5 little bad things takes it worst than the person who had 10 really big bad things, but that doesn't mean the the one who took it worst is necessarily "weak"


Maybe just maybe the person with lesser things has a weaker supporting system around them, no one to help them though.  Maybe they have some chemical unbalance making them more prone to taking it hard, there could be a whole bunch of things lying under the surface that you don't know.


Or maybe they are just genetically not able to take it the same way.


Mind you sometimes there are people who just like the attention, and don't try.   <- O.M.G.  I did not just say that!


I know it's horrible to say that, but sometimes I really think some people are dramatic for the attention.
Then again maybe it's how they build their support system.


Maybe there are some people who were just "taught" the wrong way of looking at life, or maybe it's innate and they can be "convinced" that they can look at life differently.


Maybe there are some people who just can't no matter what.  Maybe there are some people who never have the chance to recover from one "bad thing" before another hits them and they are just exhausted of always fighting alone.


If you keep kicking a person, no matter how strong they are, eventually they can't get up anymore.... even if it is little kicks!

I hate the people who hate reading other people's distress, those that tell the people hurting to just shut the **** up.  Sure I may not like to read the distress another is going through, and yes, maybe sometimes I may think they "just need to get over it", but to silence them will not make them better, it will only make them worst.   Do these so-called motivational people realize that one day they could just be the drop that convinces a person to off themselves?  Would these self righteous people even feel guilt?

A person who has not had challenges, true challenges has no right to label themselves a motivational person.  OK maybe I don't know their challenges, maybe they did have some real big things to overcome in their lives...

I do think that everyone has more strength that they could possibly imagine they have.  I think that with the right people around them, that strength can be coaxed out.  I think that people sometimes need to be heard, and loved.  I also think sometimes people need to break to become stronger.

Well that's it for now, thanks for reading.