Remember the post where I discussed the fact that I am a hoarder?

Well 17 days in to the move, at least 15 car trips(with a wagon car, holds 3X the amount as a regular car)  and 1.5 trips with a 14 cube truck and there is STILL at least a truck load of shit in the old house!  Maybe a little more!

How the bejesus did I accumulate so much STUFF!  Holey Cow!

I culled, a LOT.  Brought a lot of stuff to the garbage and much more to 2nd hand stores.  Given stuff away to people

I don't know where or how I will find space to put all this stuff away.  The kitchen does not even have a pantry.  I guess some of the stuff will have to be stored in the basement as I will have extra counter/cabinets down there.

As I unpack, I will be doing even more culling.  I must. This is a chance to start fresh ans make my life easier.  That means getting rid of the stuff I truly do not need, making room for the stuff I do need.

My son will be using almost 80% of the basement (his room is an easy third)  I hope most of his stuff will remain in his area...


Now I may be wrong about this, but I think my daughter may have more bedroom stuff than me, or it may be that my stuff is scattered all over the house while hers is contained within her bedroom too. In the new house, we are both using two bedrooms.  My closet in my actual bedroom has been removed to increase the size of the bedroom (by the way the new bed placement is more fenshui as my feet will not be facing the door) so I will be using the closet in the "office" room.  My daughter will be using both closets, the one in her actual bedroom and the one in the "costplay"/spare bedroom.  That reminds me, I need to install a second pole in my closet as it's very deep and can take two poles, one in front of the other.  I will be using the front one from every day stuff anf the back one for special or off season clothes.  I could also use another shelf in there.  Anyway, she will be filling up both closets.

Ah the expenses keep adding up.  All this to find ways to make all my stuff fit.

Mind you there are other expenses that are adding up that are unrelated to the stuff.  Maybe I should do a garage sale in the spring to help pay back for att this stuff AND get rid of stuff.

Few hundred dollars in exchange for space.... hum nice.

Tomorrow night I will be sleeping in my new room  The move will not be over by any means.  It will only be over on the 31st.  The children are home as we speak, packing up some of the remaining stuff, giving me a hand.  The daughter has informed me that they are running out of boxes already.  I swear we must have over 100 boxes.  Yeah I know.  That's a lot of stuff
Halloween, Yule, Artist supplies, Pet supplies, BOOKS.  DVDs, VHS, Games, BOOKS...

Gardening  supplies, cooking/baking supplies, hobbies, paints...tools.  A lot of stuff I tell you.

Well thanks for reading and wish me luck.