Hello all,

I have been back at work a month now and I've done a few things here and there.  I think I have made some mistakes too.

The hardest has been the commute.  I hate having to drive to and from work.  I don't bus cause I hated bussing even more, besides, with the fibro now that is not overly feasable most days.

My commute is 20 minutes on a good day, 45 minutes most days, due to traffic.

I leave home 1 hour before my shift starts.  Ughhhh.

Last week, during my regular commute, I almost had an accident twice and hit a crater-like pothole on my way to work, and all this on the SAME DAY!

So now my car is damaged until I can figure out how to pay the repair costs.  I took care of the more urgent but less pricey part of the repairs (Smashed rim and damaged tire) but the suspension is a little more complexe to take care of right now.

The news said there were 16 other cars, but those are the ones that did stick around to be counted like me, how many others were victims of this pothole?

I filed a claim with the city to cover the costs of the repairs.  I am sure many more will file claims too as the newspaper article about this nasty pothole advised to file a claim as the city had been aware of the pothole for hours before the morning rush hour and could have done something to prevent so many vehicles from being damaged.


One of the dents in the rim


The garage I went to said that I wasted my time in filing a claim for the damage, that the city is unlikely to shell out any money, that they do everything to not have to pay, including dragging on the issue for months, and sometimes years.  It's worth a try.  I could also file a claim with my own insurance but the repercussions of filing this claim on my insurance, including the deductable is unsavory.

So now my commute, using a different route for the moment, is that much more exciting.

Also, as some of you know I have been fostering a cat which had been fighting with my other cats.  Well he has calmed down considerably but one of MY cats (Trix) has not forgiven him for his scrappy beginnings and still initiates fights with him.  Well Sylver the foster will give as good as he gets in a fight and bit Trix in the face.  The bite developped into an abcess.  Now Trix has this big gaping wound in his face a bit smaller than a dime.

We brought him to be checked out by the vet and they shaved him to uncover the wound (poor thing lost his whiskers) and cleaned the wound.  He's got antibiotics and needs to go back to be checked in a little over a week.



It's been and interesting few weeks.

Thanks for reading.