It was brought to my attention recently that being depressed and suicidal is our choice.  Hating our life is not a good enough reason to be depressed and /or suicidal.  Being depressed is no more a choice than homosexuality, diabetes or cancer.
Excerpt of a conversation between two young adults  Names are blanked out but not all negative sayings.  I have no wish to live in the land of denial, it's too crowded.
A person with diabetes cannot simply shrug off their condition.  Sure some can choose to eat healthier, reducing the chances of the condition from spiraling out of control, but at the base of it, diabetes is a chemical disorder of the body.

Ever notice how sometimes, a person with a seemingly perfect life is depressed, even suicidal (Daron Richardson for example) yet another person with non-stop difficulties and challenges is not depressed?  How that person manages to find joy and satisfaction in the smallest things?

Depression is not merely an external situational condition.  A person is not depressed just because their life sucks.  Sure the fact that their life sucks might make the depression worst, just as stress and exhaustion might make the person more depressed but there is something there, before the events, predisposing a person to depression and suicidal thoughts.

This person had made comments that we were not tight on money, he was missing a lot of facts (as well as being just too inexperienced in life) to be able to make sound judgement.  I have no idea where the "father figure" comment even comes from...
Depression doesn't get better by itself.

There is only one cure for depression : Suicide.

IN the conversation in the picture above, the 21 year old discusses that death is nothingness.  In his (stupidity? ignorance?), he thinks that a suicidal person is not aware what death is, what death means.  He doesn't  get that what he describes is EXACTLY what a suicidal person WANTS.the end of it all, the end of the never-ending pain, the agony of life.  They seek nothingness.

Suicide is not "childish" or immature. There is no glory in putting up with pain and sadness for endless years.  We stay for others, not for ourselves.  We derive no pleasure out of life.


Other options for depression are treatments.  No treatments are cures. There is no living cure for depression.  They say it can get better.  I'll have to take their word for it as I have yet to experience it in my 40 years on earth.

Treatments include various drugs.  None of these drugs are guaranteed to work.   They help to balance the chemicals in the brain. Antidepressant medication, used under the guidance of a mental health professional, may relieve some of your depression symptoms. But antidepressants also come with significant side effects and dangers. What’s more, recent studies have raised questions about their effectiveness. At the very least, it’s clear that medication alone isn't enough—you also need to make changes in your lifestyle. Learning the facts about antidepressants and weighing the benefits against the risks can help you make an informed and personal decision about what’s right for you.



Experts agree that depression involves much more than just “bad” brain chemistry. Serotonin is just one of many factors that may play a role in the disorder.
New research points to other biological contributors to depression, including inflammation, elevated stress hormones, immune system suppression, abnormal activity in certain parts of the brain, nutritional deficiencies, and shrinking brain cells. And these are just the biological causes of depression.
Social and psychological factors—such as loneliness, lack of exercise, poor diet, and low self-esteem—also play an enormous role in depression.

Studies show that therapy works just as well as antidepressants in treating depression, and it’s better at preventing relapse once treatment ends. While depression medication only helps as long as you’re taking it, the emotional insights and coping skills acquired during therapy can have a more lasting effect on depression. However, sometimes depression can be too severe for simple therapy or the issues may be too complex.

Also, drugs are covered by insurance plans, therapy is not always covered, and when it is it covers very little.

Well that's it for now,  feel free to disagree with me.