My daughter is an artist.


She creates beautiful drawings.




One of her pastimes in the summer is creating beautiful drawings in the front of our house.  Usually she draws Pokemon characters, but she has been known to create other types of drawings.


Most of the neighborhood kids love her drawings.  Some have bugged their parents to get them some chalk to do some drawings too.
















The thing is the neighborhood kids have decided they are all going to draw in front of my house.  In the beginning, it was just a few cute little drawings here and there.  My daughter still had plenty of room to draw, but slowly it started growing.


More and more kids decided to do chalk drawings and all of them it seemed decided to do it in front of our house, not in front of their own!


At a certain point there so-called "drawings" started taking up every inch of the pathway in front of my house. These were not longer cute little drawings, though sometimes cute ones would be included in the whole, they resembles more big blobs of chalk colour, like the kids doing them were more preoccupied with using as much chalk as possible while making absolutely nothing at all.  Something like this:




As you can see these are not pretty, so I started mentioning, asking why all the kids were doing their drawings in front of my house.  Other people started wondering too.  It just seemed like one of those mysteries.


Some of these kids drawing in front of our house started being very rude and disrespectful towards my daughter and her drawings.  Since the drawings are chalk, therefore only temporary, she likes to take a picture of her artwork for posterity.  She respectfully asks the kids to not walk or ride on her drawings until a picture has been taken.


Of course this one kid will walk and ride on her drawings on purpose, trying to destroy her drawings for the pure pleasure of hurting my daughter.


Now my daughter is 18, this kid is no more than 11, you would think that she could put him in his place,  well when my daughter and her friend tried, he went whining to his parents and his dad came out to give my daughter and her friend shit for trying to put this kid in his place.  Didn't want to hear a thing.


Well today this kid and some others were in front of my place creating their ugly blobs when my neighbour, knowing I don't like other kids blobs marring my front walk went and asked why they would not go draw in front of their houses and leave that space so my daughter could make her own drawings.  Their answer was that they were not allowed.




What?!?!?!?!!?!?  It's OK to make ugly marks in front of my house but the parents will not tolerate their own kids artwork?


I promptly went and told the kids that they were not welcome to draw in front of my house and spayed their marks with water to erase the ugliness.


Let their parents come and give ME shit....


Thanks for reading!


Feel free to comment (I fixed the comment options)