So, I have some answers.

I wanted to know under which Bipolar umbrella I fell, Type I, Type II or  Cyclothemic.  Turns out I do not fall under any of those terms.  As my Bipolar is chemically induced by anti-depressants (Hypo mania caused by anti-depressants) they have created a catch-all category called NOS (Not Otherwise Specified) for people who must be treated like bipolar but do not exactly fall into the typical categories.

2008          2009            2010            2011
In order to treat my depression, the psychiatrist will first treat my Fibromyalgia as the problems with the Fibromyalgia acerbate the depression. (Pain and lack of sleep)  To do that, she has prescribed Gababentin.  This medication has a 2.9 % possibility of weight gain.  Once my body has adjusted, she will prescribe Lamotrigine for the depression, a mood stabilizer that actually has weight loss as a side effect. (Compared to 16% weight gain with Lyrica and more than 60% weight gain with Seroquel which my former family doctor insisted was my only treatment option.)

My main psychiatrist had be assessed by a second psychiatrist (actually a fellow under the direction of another psychiatrist) and asked for their recommendations for treatment if agreed with the original diagnosis. The fellow (Dr. Zeigman) asked me many many many questions before jumping to a conclusion.  We "chatted" for about 2 and 1/2 hours.  We discussed my various issues, past and present, including my serious problem with the fact that I had gained so much weight in the last few years and my past unhealthy methods to try and maintain an "acceptable weight" (laxative us, purging, starvation diet, eating things that I know my body has issues digesting to create a "food poisoning effect").  He agreed that any treatment must take these issues into consideration in order to be effective.  He actually referred me to a site I had previously consulted about treating bipolar with weight gain meds and the possible negative impact of doing so.  He is the one who took the time to explain the bipolar diagnosis to me and how in fit into this diagnosis.


Jan 2012          2013?         Dec 2014?

Even though I am still depressed, for the first time in such a very long time I have hope to get my life back.  I am looking at the possibility of reduced pain, reduced exhaustion and reduced depression.  In the last 4 years, I have gotten massively overweight and my fitness level has dropped so drastically that it is difficult to imagine I was ever fit.  Trying to get back to anywhere near to where I was will involve a very long road ahead, but it is not longer the massive mountain it used to be. The weight is just the physical representation of  overall health and ability.  I may never be "thin" again but if I am physically fit and healthy, even with some extra curves here and there, it would be a massive improvement.  Not having my meds work against my efforts will also be a relief. 

Two years ago, in May 2009 when I quit smoking, I tried being pro-active and went on a healthy diet prior to quitting.  I was on a 1200 calorie/day diet and I had taken up walking at lunch and breaks.  When I quit, my moods went into a tailspin and I went on anti-depressants and Seroquel.  Even though I was eating 1200 cal/day and exercising, I gained 10 pounds.  At that point, I pretty much gave up.  Continued to eat healthy but my weight continued to spin out of control.  When I stopped the medications I was unable to lose the weight.  Later the exhaustion of continued stress and the pain stripped me of all motivation to exercise.


Maybe, just maybe the tides will turn for the better in 2012, finally.  New house all mine and new meds which will help rather than hinder.  Maybe 2012 will also find an acceptable solution for my son?  We have been working so hard and so long for a solution..

Well thanks for reading!