The move is almost over!!!!!

Almost time to celebrate!!!!

We are 8 days to deadline (January 31) and the amount of things left to do is manageable.

I have at most two car loads (maybe as little as 1 in fact) of things to bring to the new house.  Yes bring as I am now living in the new house.  It feels odd as all new habits do but I will adjust.

The basement is clean, the upper level with the rooms is all vaccuumed and requires a bit of carpet cleaning.  The bath and toilet also need to be cleaned.  The main floor is also almost done but does require the most work.

The oven is almost done, just a bit of rinsing and shining.  The cupboards asre done.  The fridge is almost clean, still have to empty and clean the freezer. 

Last will be washing the laminate and cleaning the carpet (vaccuum and steamer)

Now my pride is pushing me to leave the place clean (even though the new tenants are probably going to clean the cupboards and washrooms anew and the landlord will need to change some flooring and paint a few rooms)

I also need to go get the paint.

Of course I am completely denying the amount of work required to set the new house right.  I may have packed up the old house in 2 months but it will take much longer to set up the old house.  Trying to figure out where everything goes will not be an easy task.

Sleeping in my new home definitely helped my feel like things were on the right track.  Of course the fibro is also kicking in, making the work that's left a little harder to do, but as long as my stuff it out of the house, the rest can remain undone if my health really prevents me from doing it.  Push comes to shove, my neighbour offered to help with the cleaning. I can ask her to do the floors on the main floor and maybe the floors on the upper floor.  All depends on how much she plans on charging me. Vaccuuming and mopping might be sufficient.

There are times when fibro is not a good excuse for not respecting deadlines or common courtesy.  This is one of them.  The landlord will expect the place to be clean and empty for the 1st.  No excuses.  No, I hurt my ankle, hurt my back, became ill, will be accepted, they are a business after all.

I can see the finish line, I can count the steps it will take to get there.  Will I take those steps or will they have to bring the finish line to me?