Freezing rain followed by a flash freeze often spells trouble.

For a person with FM and CFS in the middle of a move and starting her monthlies to boot, well this weather is certainly NOT a gift.

The day that I wrote my last post (after not doing anything productive the night before) I actually managed to be fairly  productive when I got home.  I caught the fish, took some water out, packed some bags and managed to fill up the back of the car (with back seat down) and bring it all over to the house.

I then took a nice DEEP bath in my new bathtub.  I slept well that night.

Yesterday I did manage to pack a few boxes as a neighbour came to help.  I also finished emptying and cleaning one of the aquariums.  The gravel was very dirty.  I am seriously considering an under gravel filter on top of the regular filter. The washroom and my bedroom are almost done. Due to inclement weather, I did NOT bring anything over to the new house so I have a car full tonight (and then some)  My neighbour offered her car as well so we can make up for not bringing anything over last night.

On Monday my landlord is having the place visited again.  Dear, I don't know WHY he is so insistent on renting out MY unit for February when he has so many currently empty and mine needs repairs anyway.  I will need to have the place presentable again.

The movers want me to take out all drawers out of the dressers they will be moving (To charge more time going up and down stairs? They are billing me per hour @ $105.00 )  So I have been thinking of using the drawers as containers for some of the stuff I am moving.  That way the drawers will already be moved.  I have plenty of boxes but why not?  At the very least, the drawers will be on the main floor.

So back to today and this weather.



Argh!

I am having a hard time holding a pen and typing.  My hands hurt.  Well most of my body hurts and I am hyper stimulated.

Earlier I went to the coffee shop where I work and there were three people conversing loudly (it seemed).  Mixted with all the other regular sounds, it was too much.  I was suffering.  These three could have gone to the seating area next door to chat.  They also happened to be in the way and people had to go around counters to get to the cash.  Very inconsiderate of these people.  One of them had already been told that he was blocking people.

Because it was so full, my co-worker went to wait for me in the Café area.  When I went to join her, the buzz of many converstations, the two TVs, noise from the outside was too much!

I considered not coming to work today, but I had obligations I felt should not  be cancelled at the last minute just because I did not feel well.

Turns out one of them cancelled on me and so far, no news from the other one.

I know I don't really have much sick time left.  I also have no vacation time left

I may ask to leave early as I am really not feeling all that great. Go to the new house and take another hot deep bath.

Well thanks for reading.