Hello all,

Just dropping by to let you all know I have not forgotten you.

Indeed I am posting less these days.  There are a few different reasons for that.

1. I have already complained about most of the things that I need to complain about.  I don't want to keep constantly spinning the same broken record.  When my life keeps throwing the same old lemons at me and I run out of sugar to make lemonade, I don't have much to say.

2. My computer monitor is dead.  I can at times make a quick Facebook update before it goes black but not much more.  My son's laptops are dead and my daughter's computer set-up is not comfortable enough to write a post.  Then at work, well, I only have my breaks and lunch.  I don't always have the time to write a post because there is so much more that needs to be done.  I need to wait till this summer to improve the at home computer situation.  Finances are much too tight between now and then.  A good friend has offered to loan me a monitor, was even willing to bring it to me last weekend, but I was not available at that time.  I will see about next weekend, maybe go to them.  Hope the monitor works on my computer...

3. Spring makes life busier, but unfortunately, so far is not making me have more energy.  In fact with the wonderfully unstable weather we are having lately, I have less "spoons" to work with.

Also, I have been thinking lately of giving my blog a new direction.  With the new house, I have all kinds of decoration ideas.  Maybe the blog could become a diary of sorts of all these changes I will or plan on making.

Oh I know there are already a lot of craft / renovation blogs out there! Most are probably better than I could ever hope to be, however, part of the point my blog would be to "motivate me". to get things done.  If I know that every week I must have some new project to write about (with pictures of course) maybe it will help me find that little something I am missing to get things done.  I already have a list of things that needs to get done:

paint the dining room walls and the cabinet - this may be two projects
paint the kitchen cabinets into a nice country colour (creme?  light blue? some other colour?  I'll need to get tester jars and paint a carboard and tack them onto my cabinets and see what looks best)
do something about the backsplash.  I have been wanting a backsplash in the kitchen since forever BUT this one is a little ugly and out-dated.  I have thought of "Smart Tiles"  on top, I also thought of ceramic paint...  The paint would probably be more work but less expensive. 
paint the tables in the living room, make them spiffy
paint the downstairs washroom in a colour other than pink, maybe get a little creative and do a Mario Bros. theme
paint my son's room
I am thinking of painting the living room too, maybe just a wall or two...
make the entryway organized and interesting...
Then there is the lanscappiong, the gardening....

What do you think?

Thanks for reading/