Has anyone hear of the sloth?  A sloth sleeps an average of 18 hours a day and tends to just lay around on branches when awake.  A Koala sleeps an average of 22 hours.

I believe I have met something even lazier than those creatures...

My Son.

Of course he does not sleep 18 to 22 hours a day, but if left to his own devices, he would play video games while lying on the couch for 18 hours a day, not eating, eliminating where is is and enjoying the warmth. and sleep for the remainder

My son's room is filled with trash.  He does not clean is room and is too lazy to bring the garbage to a trash can so he just drops it on the floor.  He does this everywhere in the house but I pick up the other rooms.  I do not pick up his room on a regular basis,  Cleaning up after him is thoroughly exhausting.  He leaves stuff lying around, anything lying around anywhere, and asking him to pick up his own things is a major production.  The conversation required to get him to pick up his stuff requires so much energy that I wind up mentally exhausted after asking him to bring his plate to the sink.  That is when he used a plate.  Many foods he will not use a plate as that would require the energy necessary to open a cupboard door and grab a plate.  Rather he walks around, eating the food and leaving a trail of crumbs.

Please note my son will not vacuum.

My son does not want to take a bath or shower because it demands too much energy and he does not get enjoyment out of those activities.  He also is not big on changing clothes.  He does not even remove his clothes for sleeping.  He will often wear the same clothes day in day out for days.  He eventually changes them because he is tired of hearing me nag.  But I have to nag A LOT! 

My son has enuresis, but he does not change his underwear for days at times.  He will wear dirty urine soaked underwear for weeks if we let him.  He also will not change his sheets or clean his mattress.  He keeps his dirty sheets in his room until we go in there and remove them.  He could just take them out and throw them into the laundry room from upstairs.  He doesn't even need to go downstairs.  I even suspect that he pees in bed just because he is too lazy to get up.

We have cats.  My son loves the cats, yet he does not want to clean the cat litter boxes.  I have even switched two of the litter boxes to the non-clumping kind so he does not have to sift every day and bought a self sifting one for the cats which prefer the clumping kind.  But dumping the used litter once a week into the green bin is too much work.  He complains that doing the cat litter is destroying his sense of smell, yet sleeping in his own urine is fine.

My son expects me to wash his clothes, clean his room, do the dishes, pick up his stuff, cook his food, cook really good and rich food,  do the cat litters, buy him everything he wants and desires, go to work and work overtime, do the groceries, shovel, feed the animals and so much more, yet none of that is work for me.  It's all easier for me than for him, even though I have CFS, FMS, BP and currently have an entrapped ulnar nerve, and a severely sprained ankle.

We are currently packing and getting ready to move.  Even though he is almost 14, he "can't" pack his own room.  It's not that he can't, it's that he is too effen lazy to do it and knows perfectly well that come moving day, if it's not done yet, someone will do it for him.  He also knows that I will be obligated to have his room cleaned eventually, under the law, so there is no need for him to do it.  He knows that I have no power whatsoever to enforce anything.  And to those parents that think they do, you are delusional.  Your power rests in your children's willingness to give it to you.  If they don't give it to you, you have none.

My son has qualified for giftedness, even though he has a learning disorder.  He is in a behaviour modification class with intellectually challenged kids because he is too lazy to bother trying to learn.  Has has no ambition whatsoever, and asking him anything with get you an "I don't know" as thinking about anything is just too much work.  He can do these things, he chooses not to.

I get that my son has a developmental delay and that he has ADHD and ODD, but those are just the icing on the cake.  They don't fully explain nor justify his total and utter laziness.

Well thanks for reading my rant.  Have a good day.


************** Update  2011-12-07

Don't know what happened to him on the day I wrote this but he was being HELPFUL!  Gotta give credit where credit is due.  He did some chores for me....