The Barenaked Ladies released this song about what he would do if he had a million dollars.



Every once in a while I think about what i would do if I had a million dollars.

Somethings never change, but some do...

Some things are taken off the list not because I have it or done it, but some other things because more important at the time.

A CBT I was seeing told me to stop thinking of what I would do because it contributes to my depression.  I feel it takes me away from my depression while I dream.  I have lottery tickets in my purse, they are due to be checked but I always take a long time to check them because as long as I don't know I can keep dreaming...

So what would I do if I had a million dollars?

Well lets see (in no particular order):

I would pay off my debts, credit cards, line of credit, car loan, mortgage
I would renovate my house, new kitchen, knock down a wall here and there, new flooring, hardwood, tiles, some carpet, new doors, some paint here and there, shower in the basement...
Do some redecorating, fix up the home office to be more functional.
Well there goes about $500,000.00 already....

I would take a month off work and take a trip with the kids, two weeks Disney, two weeks Maritimes. (with mortgage paid I may take work with income averaging and stop working compressed. Let's face it if housing is 1/3 the cost, I can take better care of myself)
Put a few K's aside for landscaping  (it's winter, I don't landscape in winter)  Some nice round edges, multilevel (cascade?) and a pond (I have a small front and back yard BUT I can still see some nice options)  I can see walls of planters in the back yard for the veggies and herbs.  Yes a wall built of planters one on top of the other with enough room in between for plants to grow, saw this in a Saigon design.

I would ensure that my kids education is covered (to a point, we are not talking about 10 years of post secondary studies here it IS after all only 1 million, not 10)
The rest would be taken up with some smaller luxuries to help make my life better.  Make my home a haven.

What would you do with a million dollars?