Hello.

As some of you know by now, I use this blog to rant  -  a lot

In particular, if a company has done something that irritates me, I'll more than likely discuss it here.

Well my recent experience with Blue Power is no different.

Why am I signed up with a power distribution company, after all the headaches that Just Energy gave me?

Well I had a moment of weakness and signed up and besides it was already too late by the time of the Just Energy debacle.


What was THAT debacle you say?  Well since you asked, I'll tell you quickly.  Even better, I'll reproduce of  the emails I sent them....

Oh I also had a nice event with a Bell Representative, you want to see that....

So back to Blue Power

Yes I have linked their website so there is no doubt at all who you should avoid...

So as you know, I moved in January.  In December, with the up-coming move upon me, I called Blue Power to advise them of my move.  They asked for my new account number.  Since I didn't have it yet, I contacted our Hydro Company to ask to hook up the new residence and give me an account number.  I found out that the lawyer for the sellers had already advised them that I was taking over since January 2011 (not 2012 like it was supposed to be)  To correct I had to get my lawyer to send them a letter confirming I was only taking over in 2012.

Well with all this, it took a while to get my account number and with the move, it completely went out of my mind.

Come February, I get my new bill for the new account and remember I must call Blue Power to give them my new account number.

I asked the lady I spoke to if she only needed the bolded numbers or of she needed the whole number.  She tells me only the bolded numbers.  While taking down the number she makes a mistake in the number.  My account had three 3's and she wrote only two.  (not that she would admit she made a mistake)  This was in February.

Early March I get a letter from a collection agency.  They are collecting an amount on behalf of Blue Power.

This was as you can guess a total SHOCK to me.

I get in touch with Blue Power, they tell me that because I am in arrears they could not transfer the contract so they deemed that I had cancelled and I now owe an early termination fee.

My accounts are NEVER in arrears.  That was impossible.  So several communications with a Blue Power representative, she tells me that they will put my collections account on hold and cancel it when the transfer is complete. 

June 19th I get a call from the collection agency.  I start emailing Blue Power.  I am definitely NOT happy.  I spam them a bit.  I want Answers.  I send them a copy of my March bill showing them I am NOT in arrears.

I get a very polite response from Blue Power saying thanking me for the copy of the bill and that I had given them the wrong account number in February (not) and they would cancel the collections and it would not affect my credit score and it would be done at the latest today.

Oh wow!


Oh very f***ing wow.  All this over an account number.

Now why they never got in touch with me regarding the issue transferring my account is beyond me.  They had my phone number, my address and as of March 2012 they even had my email address.

Most other companies would have contacted the client to inform them there was a problem.  Some if not all would have checked to make sure they had the right account, especially after I told them it was not possible that I got rejected in arrears.

No their policy is first sign of problems, straight to a collection agency.  Absolutely NO attempt to try and find a solution.

I did consider either getting a lawyer to sue them for libel and aggravation or just letting the statute of limitation take care of the "debt". You'll all agree I did not owe this amount....

I am still keeping that possibility in my back pocket.  I just might do it anyway.

Over the weekend I will create 28 emails, telling them that I do not wish to renew my contract under ANY circumstances and to not think about it.  I plan on programing them to be sent every month for the next 28 months.  I'll read the contract to make sure the non-renewal email has all the required elements...

Oh and I gotta tell you about Bell.   They totally made my day....

****** UPDATE  As of July 9th, 2012, the collection agency is STILL calling me.  So much for them fixing the problem.


******UPDATE 2 As of July 12th, they have not responded to the email I sent last week asking what was "still" wrong with my account.