As the title says, I am going to rant about religious stuff.  If you are a strong believer and don't like it when people say negative things about "God" then I strongly suggest you stop reading now.

So, I am not christian, I do not believe in a single god, so that rules out a bunch of other religions too.  I do believe there is "POWER" out there, but I don't see it as much of an interfering kind.  I don't believe there is one single entity that grants favours if you pray to it.

When my daughter was born, there was a strong push for me to have her baptised.  It HAD to be done according to almost everyone I knew.  For years I had to fight those that wanted me to bring my children into the fold of their "religion" by people who did not even know their religion properly and kept breaking it's rules, in some pretty major ways, on a daily basis.

Some said, just do it for the pretty rites, for the pictures, gifts and memories, like that's a reason to saddle your child with a religion you do not believe in?

Something I do STRONGLY believe in is the power of the MIND.  I think faith has a lot more to do with the power of the mind than the power and influence of some heavenly body.  I you believe in something strong enough, you can effect change.

I also believe in concepts such as luck, karma and destiny.  The more positive energy you put out in the world, the more will likely come back to you.  Sometimes that positive energy is sent out in the form of prayers.  That's fair.  I do think actions of goodness outweigh "prayers". Some people naturally have luck, some people don't.  Some people "need" to travel a certain path for the lessons they need to learn.

Considering the above, it seriously bugs me when I hear or read stuff like: "put your life in the hand of God, he will provide" or "many of us rely on God to meet our needs and he never fails"

Hum.... no.

This GOD is supposed to be all loving, all forgiving.  I see instances everyday where GOD is not providing.  Oh choice and the devils influence explain those.  Nice try!

I do also think need to seriously STOP trying to impose their religion and beliefs on other people.  You want to believe and live according to those ways for yourself, go ahead, you totally have that right and I think you need to do what makes you happy and fulfilled.  You however need to respect that your formula just may not work for the person next to you.

Live and let live.  Respect others.Teach goodness, not for religious sakes but for the fact that the need for goodness is universal.

Protect and help the weak because it's the right thing to do.

Religion does not belong in public institutions.  Can we stop that already?  Swearing on the bible in court?  I'd rather be swearing on my honour.  Prayers at council meetings?  Nope, not the place.  Forcing children to take religious courses at school because not enough parents thought to ask for a morality course instead?  Not right.


Schools should be a place for teaching stuff like science, language and history (in an unbiased way).  I see nothing wrong with teaching the biology of sexuality to children.  I also see nothing wrong with informing them about the diversity of gender and sexual orientation.  These things are out there in their society. If you want to push the concept of "choice" in these matters, that belongs at home, but it's not wrong for them to be exposed to a more neutral way of understanding these concepts. Religion should be taught in the home and/or churches, not the school system.  (As an aside, I know colleges and universities teach a variety of religions, I am OK with that as they are not trying to push a belief, it's more of an information thing, providing knowledge about them rather than indoctrination.)

As for civic and statutory holidays being based on one religion.  Please. I know my country was built on one particular religion, but it really no longer reflects its current mosaic.  Provide 11 civic and /or statutory holidays to be taken according to the need of the individual. Doing so would provide better coverage of services across the board to everyone. November 11th should be mandatory for everyone.  While it's war related, and many are against war, it's also a celebration of peace and the sacrifices of many towards that goal.

OK, I think I am done ranting for now.  There is a possibility I will come back to this post and rant some more.

Thanks for reading and I hope I dd not offend too many.  I am open to comments about your point of view as always.

Oh I just wanted to add one small little thing, for those of you who might be temped to tell me to "go home" or "go back to my own country"  A have a large dose of First Nation Abenaki blood running through my veins (along with a variety or European blood)  I AM home!