Many studies have been done on the importance of beauty.  It is a proven fact that beautiful people get more advantages in life.

Beautiful people are more deserving of love.

Beautiful people are viewed as smarter.

Beautiful people are given more opportunities.

Beautiful people elicit more support during hard times.

Beautiful people are forgiven their faults easier.

Read the following articles to be convinced:

- The Advantage of Beauty

- The advantages of beauty

- Do Beautiful People Get Treated Better?

- Face Value

These articles are just the tip of the iceberg.  There are so many more articles written some much more scientific.

The world treats ugly people like second class citizens.  Even families treat the ugly duckling among them like crap.

I have been considered pretty

Worthy of support
Desired




Intelligent


and I have been considered ugly
Lazy

Unworthy

Stupid
I know I wrote about this before in Weighty Issue but I have been reminded of it lately by some comments left about my current Facebook picture.

Current Facebook picture, taken around Halloween by my daughter Fooling around with masks


Some people commented (in French) about my picture.  Loosely  translated, my aunt is telling me that my current picture is unacceptable because I am ugly, she wants me to put a picture where I am pretty. 

I respond that beauty is temporary and my picture reflects my sense of humour which is my best quality and more permanent. 

My mother replies that she hates my HORRIBLE picture and wants me to put one up from years ago when I was pretty, which no longer reflects the person I truly am.

My daughter responds that they wonder why I get depressed so often when the people I love cannot accept me as I am, and when I try to express myself they always accuse it and me of being ugly.  She took that picture, of me making a face, every one does them and they have to get over it.

My family does not accept me as I am.  They are ashamed of me as I am.  Their comments always reflect these feelings whenever they speak to me.  They say they love me as I am, but want me to lose weight (and not for my health, but for beauty)  They want me to use the pictures of when I was anorexic and bulimic because that was so much better.  Now that I am older, ill and fat with grey and drab hair, I am an insult to their surrounding.  I am the monster in their midst.  Then they wonder why I don't want to visit, why I absolutely hate living among them, why I became so suicidal.

My daughter noticed years ago how I would always become depressed after visiting my mom, how I would cry on the way home or cry after a phone conversation with her.  She saw how horrible it all made me feel.  I have been trying to become stronger, trying to love myself, however I am, trying to not care what other people say or think of me.  But when those I love just can't accept me and criticize who I am, it hurts and sets my recovery back.

I know they will read this and be displeased.  They certainly will not agree with anything I have written, but then again, I could never do anything right anyway, so it's not new.

They disapprove whether I try really hard not, I might as well just be me and say it like it is..

Well thanks for reading.