Hello peoples!!!


Well after my last few posts, you can tell that I have not been doing too well.

So....

I have been keeping myself busy to chase away the negative thoughts as much as possible.  It's not working too well with my son not going to school and being obsessive and unstable around me.

My son has been forgetting to take his pills which makes him rather violent and extremely obsessive.

His latest obsession since I got a net book to do my surfing and blogging is to get a new laptop capable of of playing his %**^$%#*^ games.  My netbook was as little expensive to have a reliable product as I could manage.  1GB ram 320 hard drive...  I borrowed money from my Line of Credit to get it...

He wants  a strong processor, about 4GB ram.  Lots and lots of HD....  This costs more, money I don't have.  He won;t go to school so he can stay home and flip out at his current laptop which keeps shutting down.

Stand up for yourself, put your foot down, be authoritative...  Well that is someone without fibro, more physical strength than I have, not under CAS radar for being a single mom with a mental illness.  Call the cops if he attacks or threatens you.  Oh, guess who gets to pay his legal fees...guess who is responsible...

Parents have no right, we have to sit and take it.  That's it.I have to put up with it until he turns 18 and sen him to crisis unit when he crosses the line...  and by crossing the line, that line is VERY far...

Anyway, enough about that.

On October 19th I had open flap surgery on all 4 quadrants, and closed in the front.  They "put me under" for the surgery (but I don't remember being under)  Since then I have been having trouble eating.  My teeth have become extremely sensitive.  The gums were hurting  but the teeth, oh gosh... massive pain.  Even brushing my teeth with sensitive teeth toothpaste hurts.  I think I have a cavity.  Seeing them tomorrow...

I have done a bit more cleaning, not much laundry folding but  a bit here an there, yet the house is looking as dirty as ever, if not dirtier...


I have been cooking desserts as well as other stuff.  I don't cook everyday but more than before.  
I switched the guest bedroom and the office, 
Unpacked and organized a few things here and there, 
Prepared the Halloween candies and decorations, 
Changed the light in the kitchen, 
Bought a bed that will not fit in the stairs, 
Went out karaokeing with little success. Remind me that I hate doing that.  Especially with Alcohol available.
I also cleaned the back yard a bit
Not much I know but hey I am supposed to be RESTING...



I am also shopping for a new phone company as I don't think Wind has any intent or motivation to fix the issues, just waiting for an unlock.

I know what I am getting my son for his Bday and Xmas but I don't know what I am getting my daughter for her bday which is in November.  Maybe I can paint her furniture....   it needs to get done after all.

I wanted to do 14 things last week:


  Fold clean laundry
Clean laundry that got dirty this week
Sort the hamper of socks
Clean all the cat litters, they are all overdue   [✓]
Clean all the hamster cages (severely overdue)  [✓]
Finish cleaning the backyard, empty all the pots etc. etc. etc....  [1/2 ✓]
Vacuum house from top to bottom (twice) 
Shine floors
Put vinyls on futons (after cleaning them throughout of course)  [✓]
Sort books and VHS to get rid of.
Reorganize kitchen cupboards  [1/2 ✓]
Clean the fridge
Make more hard boiled eggs
Make more muffins


I got 5 somewhat done...  Must do better next week....

Thanks for reading...