Well I don't have much to say today, mind you I didn't have all that much to say yesterday either, I was so tired (as those of you who read yesterday's post might have been able to tell) that I decided to steal the idea of a friend of mine and customize it.

The Best Chick Flicks, according to me.

For the original post  http://feliciamaystevenson.blogspot.com/

What makes a good chick flick?  I like to have a good dose of humour in my love stories.  Keep in mind that humour is NOT mandatory, as you will see below.  Must the guy be a hunk?  Man no, I don't find some of the guys from my favorite movies to be hunks (Billy Cristal) but the personality just makes up for it.

If the guy can do something amazing for her, (build a house, travel in time, write letters from the grave) even better!

I have a really hard time figuring out levels of best, like the NUMBER  1 BEST, so I just want to enumerate a bunch of great chick flicks I've seen without trying to grade them.


So here goes

The Proposal: Ryan Reynolds and Sandra Bullock

The older woman and the younger man, and what a man it is!  The underling winds up having some power and a B*tch becomes human and lovable.  I love when she is chanting with Betty White in the forest.  Priceless!


PS I Love You Gerard Butler and Hilary Swank

Not much funny in here, it actually made me cry.  There are moments of cuteness for sure, like when he is protecting her from the fierce will dog...  I also like when she kisses her longtime friend and they discover there is no chemistry.

I do but I don't  Dean Caine and Denise Richards

A divorced wedding-planner who falls for the groom-to-be.  This movie was made for TV, yet I still included as a good chick flick.  First Dean Caine is HOT.  Second, there was a lot of comedy in this movie, many moments of tension and a great finale


The Notebook  Ryan Gosling and Rachel Mac Adams

This movie needs no introduction, I don't think there is anymore on the northern hemisphere who is not aware of it.  He builds a house for her...  and that line "... it's STILL not over"  SWOON.  Now ever since I saw Ryan Gosling in Young Hercules, I will never be able to summon hormones for him, BUT this movie came close...


Wedding Date  Dermot Mulroney and Debra Messing

A single woman hires an escort to accompany her to a wedding to make an ex jealous.  He teaches her all about romance and sensuality and of course he totally falls for her.

Lots of funny moments, Debra is a hoot.


When Harry met Sally  Billy Cristal and Meg Ryan
Harry and Sally meet when she gives him a ride to New York after they both graduate from the University of Chicago. The film jumps through their lives as they both search for love, but fail, bumping into each other time and time again. Finally a close friendship blooms between them, and they both like having a friend of the opposite sex. But then they are confronted with the problem: "Can a man and a woman be friends, without sex getting in the way?"

Practical Magic  Aidan Quinn and Sandra Bullock

In this movie, the four main actors are all women, Sandra, Nicole Kidman, Stockard Channing and Dianne West however there is a side love story that ties the whole thing together.  I love that scene where Sandra runs toward her love.

Wedding Singer : Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore

Anything that can make the 80's look this amazing gets my vote.
Robbie, the singer and Julia, the waitress are both engaged to be married but to the wrong people. Fortune intervenes to help them discover each other.



Say Anything John Cusak and Ione Skye

High school senior Lloyd Dobler wants nothing more than to go out with beautiful and intelligent Diane Court. Lloyd attempts to win her heart over the objections of her over-protective father before Diane leaves for a scholarship in England.



27 Dresses

Two things about Jane: she never says no to her friends (she's been a bridesmaid 27 times and selflessly plans friends' weddings), and she's in love with her boss, George, nurturing dreams of a lovely, romantic wedding of her own. She meets Kevin, a cynical writer who finds her attractive, and that same week her flirtatious younger sister Tess comes to town. Jane silently watches George fall for Tess, a manipulative pretender. Worse, Jane may be called upon to plan their wedding. Meanwhile, Kevin tries to get Jane's attention and has an idea that may advance his career.


Sabrina  Hunphrey Boggart and Audrey Hepburn

A playboy becomes interested in the daughter of his family's chauffeur. But it's his more serious brother who would be the better man for her.

I saw the remake with Harisson Ford and Julia Ormond.  Both version have their own positives, but nothing beats Boggart and Hepburn.
  
The Lake House Keannu Reeves and Sandra Bullock

A lonely doctor who once occupied an unusual lakeside home begins exchanging love letters with its former resident, a frustrated architect. They must try to unravel the mystery behind their extraordinary romance before it's too late.




Somewhere in Time Christopher Reeves and Jane Seymore
A Chicago playwright uses self-hypnosis to find the actress whose vintage portrait hangs in a grand hotel.