 See this email chain below, this guy needs an attitude adjustment.  The right answer would have been nothing OR a "again we apologize"

On Wed, Dec 7, 2011 at 12:59 PM, Vicki Mercier <vicki_mercier> wrote:</vicki_mercier>

MOVING DATE: Saturday, 21st January 2012 REFERRED BY: Google Yahoo PACKING REQUIRED: No
CONTACT INFORMATION
Name:  Vicki Mercier Company:               N/A Email:          vicki_mercier@hotmail.com Phone:      
ORIGIN LOCATION
 DESTINATION LOCATION
   FURNITURE & APPLIANCES

   SPECIAL NOTES
Aquariums in the home are being moved by owners and not included in move date.
 Both house are basement, level and upper.
 Some items left in home to be removed by charities.

From: Matt Guest
Sent: Wednesday, December 14, 2011 10:58 PM
To: vicki_mercier@hotmail.com
Subject: Estimate for your upcoming move on Jan.21, 2012.


Hi Vicki,

Sorry for the delay in responding to your request. I had accidentally marked your e-mail as having been read.
The following is an estimate for using our services to complete your upcoming relocation. Please reply with your acceptance of the following terms in order to book a moving crew.
Note - your estimated cost would be around $150 lower if you were to move on the following Monday instead.

ESTIMATE
The rate for the moving crew will be $160 per hour for 3 movers and a truck with 24 foot cargo hold for approximately 9 hours of moving time. There is a 4 hour minimum for moving time plus an additional charge of 1 hour at the same rate for travel time. Travel time covers the cost of getting the crew to the job and back to the office at the end of the job. Billing is pro-rated in 15 minute increments after the minimum hours have lapsed. Bed bags, couch wrap, and use of up to 3 wardrobe boxes are also included in the hourly rate. Your minimum charge will be $800 plus tax and your estimated cost around $1600 plus tax.


Thank you for considering our services and do not hesitate to contact us should you have any questions or concerns.
Regards,
   Matt Guest
General Manager
First Rate Movers Inc.
www.firstratemovers.com
613-260-0505 or 1-866-442-0505
Proud member of:
Better Business Bureau
 Canadian Association of Movers
Canadian Federation of Independent Business

On Thu, Dec 15, 2011 at 5:42 PM, Vicki Mercier <vicki_mercier> wrote:</vicki_mercier>
   I went with a company that got back to me (call and email) within 24 hours

Figured you guys don’t need business.

From: Matt Guest
Sent: Thursday, December 15, 2011 9:08 PM
To: Vicki Mercier
Subject: Re: Estimate for your upcoming move on Jan.21, 2012.

Hi Vicki,

Perhaps you missed my statement, "Sorry for the delay in responding to your request. I had accidentally marked your e-mail as having been read."
This was a mistake, not an act of ignorance or a blatant demonstration that we don't care about your business.
As well, the response page that appears when you submit an estimate request says "If planning to move within the next 60 days, you might consider calling our office.
We often book up to a few months in advance and availability may be very limited."
As it turns out, the 21st is one of the few days we have left available is January. Had you called as we suggested, we would have given you an estimate over the phone, searched for and found your request, and then responded with an estimate for you by e-mail as well (likely that same day).
Again, I apologize for the mistake but these things happen from time to time.

Regards,
   Matt Guest
General Manager
First Rate Movers Inc.
www.firstratemovers.com
613-260-0505 or 1-866-442-0505

Proud member of:
Better Business Bureau
 Canadian Association of Movers
Canadian Federation of Independent Business

From: Vicki Mercier
Sent: Thursday, December 15, 2011 9:20 PM
To: Matt Guest
Subject: Re: Estimate for your upcoming move on Jan.21, 2012.
Hi Matt,

I did try calling, for several days.
Always a voicemail
Eventually left a voicemail, and still took you a few days to call back.  Yes I did read that part, but it still took you long and it’s not possible to speak to a live person when you call.

This response of yours to my statement shows a lack of professionalism, I am now happy I went with another company


It’s still many days too late.  When you called back and left a message on my work phone  (two days later) it was also too late.

It might have been a mistake, but this email is not.

Thank you for the response.