So I have finally entered the smart phone era.

I have a HUAWEI U8651T


It's my first phone with a Sim card.

Hey now easy.... I never said I was ahead of the crowd. Actually I tend to wait till the prices drop before hopping on the bandwagon.

Getting the phone was not as easy as you would think.

After several years with the same provider, (since 2004) I decided to go with a new provider as they are quite honestly, much more affordable.  I wanted to port my number over as I have had that number for so long, it became part of me.

And that is when the trouble began.  Or misunderstanding which caused more misunderstandings and mistakes after mistakes.

When looking at the phones, I zoomed in on the Huawei immediately.  I noticed that it said pay 0$ down with any plan.

In my innocence I didn't realize there was a "pay before plan" and a "pay after plan".  The "deal" of 0$ down came with the "pay after" type of plan only, as the "pay before" if more of a pay as you go.  Having always been on contracts with my providers and billed at the end of the month, I assumed that by asking for a plan that it was going to be the "pay after" type where I am billed.  The sales agent assumed that I wanted the "pay before" and set me up that way.

I was very surprised when she told me I had to pay close to 200$.  Actually I was so surprised I kinda "froze"  I figured that since I started with the 25$ plan that maybe it only came with the 40$ plan.  When the sales person mentioned the "top up" it never dawned on me since I thought I was on billing.  Note that the $40 plan was going for $29 for a year and NO ONE ever mentioned it to me.

I was kicking myself for not going with the 40$ plan but figure I would just think about it.  Got home and started playing with my phone, setting up apps and contacts.  Changed the background.  Stuff you do to make a phone yours.

By Tuesday I noticed my data plan was not yet activated.  I don't get enough calls on my cell to notice whether or not the phone is working.  I call my provider to ask why my data plan is not working.  She tells me my account is suspended because I did not pay my service by the deadline, which was July 20th, 2012.

This is I got the phone on July 21st.  I think I am on a billing.  I paid 200$ I wasn't supposed to, not they want me to spend even more money to activate my phone.  The woman on the other end of the line has limited understanding of the English language and doesn't speak french either.  I try to explain and she becomes very rude and starts arguing with me.

I was already a little annoyed with the lack of professionalism of the phone machine.  What self respecting company welcomes their client with the phrase "What's up"  and "Let's chat"?  I am not a 13 year old nor do I have the urge to be "cool" to deny the fact that I am a mature adult.  (Mature as in old, not mature as not childish k?)

I tell her to never mind I will just go cancel the service after work.  She cost the company one and maybe more clients.

As I am checking out my receipt, I find a top up code.  I use it into my phone.  Shazam!  My data starts working.

I send my provider an email through their online system.  I don't want to call again, it was much too unpleasant.  I get a confirmation email, saying they will respond to me in 24 to 48 hours.  I want to know if I switch plan to the 40, will the phone be reimbursed?

48 hours later, still no response.  I send a second email, asking when I can expect a response.  To this date I was never responded yet and it has been over 96 hours.

Anyways, not wanting this issue to drag on forever, I force myself to call their customer service line (ughhhh).  After about 30 minutes and many conversations with his supervisor, the agent finally realized the problem, that I was on the wrong type of plan.  He told me to go back to point of purchase and it could be switched over no problem.  I could keep my number and be credited the 200$. (Case # C-9944876)

After work I go to the point of purchase.  I have my receipt but they ask for the box.  They say they have to do a full return and give me another phone.  Cancel and start over.  I go get the box at home and return to the point of purchase.

There are two employees there, one is about to leave.  Turns out it's the one I would have needed as the other one is new and had never done a return.  I have to give it to him, he asked but was given the wrong information.  This caused him to make some mistakes that could not be fixed right away, such as canceling my number rather than having it ported over.  They gave me another number but for all intents and purposes, it's useless as no one knows it.

I have to give it to the guy, he spent about an hour trying to fix other people's mistakes, probably loosing a commission in the process.  When he called to have the amounts credited (there were two amounts, totaling the close to 200$) and have the number ported over, I could see him coming close to loosing it on the phone when they explained to him the mistake on the consequences on the phone number (it would take 2-3 business days to fix, since it's Thursday after 5, it means I would have my number until Tuesday or Wednesday) and they can only get him to credit part of the money (the cost of the phone) and not the whole amount.  Only his manager can credit the balance and his manager won't be on site after 5 until August 3rd, so I don't get my money until then.  (Case # C-9947696)

They also gave me a new phone, a new sim card.  I had to start setting it up all over again (download apps, set ups contacts etc etc....

I somehow also lost some videos I had taken.


**** I will enjoy this phone though, already liking having access to my emails and Facebook all the time.


***** Thanks for reading.

To be continued...  wind-mobile-saga-continues   and wind-mobile-still-waiting-for-resolution

P.S.  I am very sorry for all the typos, I tend to publish before I spell check.  Horrible habit I know.