I guess you should start by reading this post.

Then see the updates I posted:

(July 31, 2012)********** OMG called Wind to find out when my # will be ported to my phone. They had not placed the order yet. Meanwhile people can't reach me. No compensation offered for the inconvenience they are causing with their constant screw-ups. Two days later they have not called back nor responded to my text. This is customer service folks!  I call them and after 45 minutes. They inform me my # cannot be ported because they cancelled it. 10 days I 'be been waiting and if I cancel now I lost $250.****  (Case C-10004448)

I don't WANT the number I have, I HATE the number I have.  I purposely did not pick a number (I would have kept the same last four digits if I knew) because I thought I was keeping the number I had for years.


So far, this has got to be the WORST company I have dealt with yet!

This kind of shit doesn't happen to every customer. Yet this kind of thing tends to happen to me a lot.  It happened with Teksavvy when I switched over, it happens with most companies I start doing business with.

Why?

(August 3, 2012) ********Update, they called.  Told me my number belonged to another provider and they had to change my number (result of blog maybe?  I do say I hate the number they had given me.).  I got to pick a new number.  Initially they offered to port my old number and asked which provider had it.

Ah the power of social media.

(August 5, 2012) *******The saga continues...

Turns out my blog had nothing to do with it, my number actually belonged to another of their clients (which explains all the text messages I was getting).

When I got my new number, they did not give me my voicemail.  Took a few days to realize my voicemail had been cancelled with the new number.  Know what else was cancelled?  My data plan and my 200 credit (which I was using to pay for my voicemail).  So on top of everything, I don't even get the specials that came with my enrolment anymore, I pay for an everything unlimited and don't get the unlimited data plan that comes with their friggen advertisements.

I guess I'll look into getting my phone unlocked and see if another provider will be more interested in having me as a client.

 (August 9, 2012)

I get my invoice.

On the invoice,
They are charging me $8.something for my interim number
They are charging me $42.00 for my plan (which is supposed to be 40)
They are charging me voicemail $8.00
The total is $67.00

There is no sign of :
The $25.00 credit for the amount I was "overcharged" due to the mistake when I enrolled
The $200.00 credit for new clients (Promotion), which is supposed to take care of my voicemail.
So  a bill that I expected to be about $20.00 is $67.00

I send a text message to Wind - but then remember they have yet to respond to ANY of the text messages I have sent, so I don't know why they offer that option.  They also do not respond to the emails sent through their website even though you get that confirmation thing.

So I call, at 8 AM, as soon as they open.

My intention is to have my issues fixed.  Namely:

the 200 credit reinstated (Promotion)
the 25 credited to my account
Resolve the double billing
get some kind compensation for all the aggravation I have been though.
Well it didn't work.  I am trying to figure out how to reach the ombudsman or something cause my request to speak to a supervisor did not work.  I should first tell you how the call went.  Understand that I am not a happy camper and speaking to Wind tends to make me very angry, so much so that I get tightness in my chest and have trouble breathing.  I think I actually go red in the face too.

Actually as I sit here typing I am having chest pains.  Not gonna see a doctor.  I have fibro and GERD, doctors tend to be a waste of time...

Back to the call, sorry for digressing.

So they answer and I go on a spiel that I want someone to fix my problems once and for all, enumerating all the issues I have had.

So far so good.  He is being OK.

He asks for my number, my PIN name and so on.

Then we start getting into the crux of the call. 

First we start with the $8.something being billed for the temp number.  I explain, he initially says the $8.something will be annulled.

Then $200.00 credit (Promotion).  Back and forth we go with information and research.

- First he tells me that my handset does not qualify for the promotion.  This is odd as when I first enrolled, with the ported over number it qualified for the promotion..  When they moved my plan and made me start fresh, it qualified for the promotion, but now it does not.

- After going to check some more, he comes back and tells me that I no longer qualify cause I changed my number.  Yes my number changed.  Three times.  I am not happy about the all the changes in my number.  As far as I am concerned, I wish I was still on my initial number.  The one I wanted ported over.  I never asked to change number.  It was done to me.  This is not in my file.  According to their files I requested a new number.  He said he would have the credit investigated and they would get back to me in 3 to 5 days.  I have heard that before... (Case # C-10004448)

Next we move on to the $25.00 I was overcharged when I enrolled.  This is where things start getting nasty.
He tells me that since I used the code I could not have it credited. Note that case C-9944876, C-9947696 and C-10004448 all indicate that since it was due to employee error that it could be credited.  
(Side note, they don't give me case numbers anymore, this may not be a good thing)

After I somewhat lose my cool over this.  You have to give it to me, this would push almost anyone to lose their cool, the guy tells me "Whatever!"

I ask to speak to a supervisor.  He puts me on hold for several minutes to be transferred to a supervisor.

Eventually he comes back and tells me I have to go to point of sales (POS) to have the $25.00 credited to my account.  Have to speak to a manager as they can't do it there.  The manager is never there during the evening.

He tells me the promotion $200 credit will be reinstated but I have to pay the extra $8.something.

He tells me that I have to "advance pay the $40.00 dollars as a deposit, that it will come off later.  (I have heard that before too) 

I never got to speak to a supervisor. I figure they say anything to just get you off the phone.  Nothing is recorded or documented.  Then the customer is stuck with the bill and lousy customer service.

I remember the old days Where they would have said sorry m'mam, here is something for your troubles.

Nowadays, its "Whatever", no apology, we don't give a F*ck about our clients.

I am from the old school of client services.  This offends me in so many ways.

August 13, 2012

My daughter pays $29 for the same services I pay $40 with Wind. Went to Point of sales (POS) today, met the manager only to be told, he can't do the credit ($25). He emailed his back office and his area manager. You'd think that since I pay $11 dollars more a month than many of their customers that they would make a better effort.

He took my email address to get back to me later about what can be done about this $25.  I am getting a bad feeling about this.  While I was there he called his back office and spent a good deal of time chatting with them.

Also, "escalation" tried calling me twice.  Once I was driving (I don't talk and drive) on the10th and the other time I was busy and not able to take the call on the 11th.  I tried calling back only to be told that I had to wait for that specific agent to reach me.  (You'd think they would have taken my name and number ans relayed the message or something.)

In an effort to get things resolved I have also tweeted Wind_Cares (don't get me started on that one) and was told my case was escalated to the "Social Media Supervisor"


HI!  Hope you fix this...   Considering the amount of hours I spent trying to get this resolved, and how much I earn per hour.  Wind owes me a lot of mulah now....

August 17, 2012

I called Wind today.  I had been waiting for a callback from them since the 11th, when I missed their call.  I had also been waiting for an email from the POS manager since the 13th, or even a response of some kind since my Tweet.


Since I had neither, I called, only to "loose connection" twice.  I've worked in call centres for long enough to know I was "flushed" twice.

So I called back a third time to ask for a status.  After putting me on hold  for an extensive amount of time the agent comes back and tells me that my issues, all my issues (except the phone number that they lost of course) will be resolved in the next 3-5 business days.  Someone is supposed to call me to let me know once the issues have been fixed.  They have been working on this since the 12th they said.  THE 12TH!

Not July 31st, not August 3rd, nor August 9th, which is when all this was supposed to be looked into according to the last time I called but the 12th.  This coincides with my sending them a link to my blog.  I wonder what they were planning on telling me on the 10th and 11th if they only started working on my credits on the 12th?  It might explain why they had not called me back.  Maybe the original call back was a too bad so sad sucks to be you response.. but they decided to change that response for some reason or other.  I do write for Broowaha too.

Note that the 12th was a SUNDAY. Not sure they are giving me the right date.  They have been known to say anything to get me off the phone on the past.

Forgive me for not jumping for joy just yet.

I was waiting to pay my bill until the issues were rectified, which changed the amount I was to pay.  My deadline was the 19th, but since that's this Sunday, and not a bank business day, today was in fact my deadline.

I sent them a payment for approximately what I think I owe and not the amount of my bill.  I took the amount of my bill $67, minus $16 ($8 voicemail to be paid through the promotional credit and $8 for them billing my temporary #) and minus $25 (the amount I was overcharged when they put me on the wrong plan) and sent them $26.  I figure this amount will take care of the taxes involved.

They will get the amount late.  It will take my bank 2-3 business days to process.  I've been thinking of sending them $26 for about a week now.  My bad for waiting till the last minute.

Mind you I could argue I was waiting for them.  If resolving MY issues had been a higher priority for them, maybe paying them would have been a higher priority for me.

Thanks for Reading.

To be continued... wind-mobile-still-waiting-for-resolution