So does anyone ever get the feeling that everything that goes wrong in the world is their fault?

Like they can't do anything right?

That is how I have been feeling lately.  Well I have definitely been told quite clearly that I am not good enough, that I don't have the right to rest and relax and enjoy the company of friends.  That I am lazy.

It's been quite clear, I got it.  I also hear that I am a total failure as a human being and as a mother.  I get that too.  The message is clear.  I can't take care of my son that my daughter is obligated to do all the work.  I failed to raise him to become a decent and productive member of society.

Everything is the house breaks or becomes dysfunctional because of me.  I am but a poor substitute for the other parent they once had. She did everything right, I do everything wrong. Rather than getting rid of her, I should have gotten rid of myself.  Things would have been much better for everyone. I decided to be stupid enough to buy a house and subjected everyone to loads of work.  Now every one's life is upside down and gone to hell and it's all my fault.  I wanted to achieve something for me but forgot, I don't deserve to have anything.

It's useless to cry.  Only worthless lazy crybabies cry.  No point is trying to lash out or try to explain.  There is no excuse.  I am a useless human being.  There is no excuse for that.

I have been reading  Louise Hay.  She defines the spiritual meaning of body aches and pains:

This is taken from this website: http://www.squidoo.com/spiritualmeaning#module12446061 which makes reference to this website: http://www.louisehay.com/

ACNE: Not accepting or disliking self

ANKLE PAIN: Inflexibility and guilt Inability to receive pleasure.

ARTHRITIS: Feeling unloved, criticism, resentment

BACK (upper): Lack of emotional support, or feeling unloved.
BACK (middle): Guilt. Stuck in all that stuff back there or Get off my back.

BACK (lower): Financial woes and concerns.

BLACK HEADS: Small outbursts of anger.
BREATHING PROBLEMS:  Fear or the refusal to take in life. Not feeling worthy to take up space.

CARPAL TUNNEL: Anger and frustrations at life's seeming injustices.

DEPRESSION: Anger, hopelessness.
 ELBOW PROBLEMS: Not being flexible, not able to change directions or accept new experiences.

ASTIGMATISM:  Inability to see ahead with Joy

FEET PROBLEMS:  Fear of the future or not wanting to move ahead

GUM PROBLEMS:  Inability to back up decisions.  Being wishy-washy about life.

HEADACHES:  Self-criticism. Not wanting to accept what is going on.

KNEE PROBLEMS:  Inability to bend.  Stubborn ego and pride. Fear. Inflexibility.  Won’t give in.

LEG PROBLEMS: Fear o the future, not being able to carry things forward.

MIGRAINE HEADACHE:  Sexual fears, or fear of being close. Letting someone in too close.  Feeling driven or pressured.

OVERWEIGHT PROBLEMS: Fear, feeling a deep need for emotional protection, Running away from feelings, insecurity.

PAIN: Self punishment, feeling emotional guilt.

SHOULDER PROBLEMS: Carrying the weight of the world on your shoulders, Feeling life is a burden.
SNORING: Stubborn refusal to let go of old patterns.

If one reads all of my physical issues listed and their spiritual meanings, one sees a pattern.  A lot of guilt, a dislike for oneself, a fear of going ahead and or the future, a stubbornness and inflexibility.  There is also a lot of unexpressed anger, which would be odd considering how much negativity is released through this blog.

I have had requests from wonderful caring people to reach out when the negativity and darkness overwhelms me.  It is very difficult to reach out when you feel unworthy.  I write.  I try to release the darkness through my writing.

Anger.  Yes, there is a lot of anger.  The emotion is eating me up inside.  Only about 10% of my anger is released, the rest is contained by my muzzle.  Anger is not acceptable.

I am angry at my kids, all the time.  Every hour and everyday, I am angry at them.  I am angry at me for my inadequacies.  I am angry at their lack of Independence, at their reliance on me.  I am angry that I feel chained to all my responsibilities.  I am angry that I expect sometimes more out of them than what I could do/be at their age, then I am angry and the things I could do at their age that they can't.  I am angry that I compare them to me.  I am angry that I can't do everything by myself, that I need so much help.  I am angry to always have to ask often to be ignored.  I am angry that I let things pile up.  I am angry that I can't express myself.  I am angry that I am such a wimp.  I am angry that everything I do for myself has such a high price.  I am angry that cheaters and liars and thieves get little consequences but that I always get tenfold.

Sometimes the violence inside of me scares me.  I am scared that one day it will burst free and I will be totally unable to contain it.  I am scared of what I will do it I can't keep the damn closed.