There are several times during each year when my creative senses seem to jolt to life. During those times, I find it hard concentrating on much other than creating and making or thinking about creating and making. 

I have noticed that the time from Thanksgiving until Christmas day is one of those times. Something clicks in my brain, and I just find myself wanting to make everything. And I love it. Although it does prove challenging to balance it and keep it in check with all of my responsibilities. 

Even our homeschooling days reflect this. Sure we continue on with our math and grammar and history, but this is the time of year when I find that it's pertinent to fit in the creative enrichments that I find so important. Classical music fills the air. The yarn and paint and fabric is usually littering many surfaces of our home. The piano and guitar are humming away. The oven is churning out many more yummy delicacies than it does any other time of the year. 

Right now, with the encouragement of Bob Ross (or should I say his old re-runs on Netflix) my kids are enthralled with painting. We're using acrylics as Brad had a bin of them left over from his painting days many years ago (note: acrylic paints stay good even after twenty years of not using them as long as they're sealed tight.) We picked up some canvases, and the kids have been spending many hours at the kitchen table painting. 

While they are busy creating their masterpieces, I'm finding moments of time to knit and cross-stitch. I did some Christmas gift knitting, and now I am trying to focus on getting some socks done that have been on the needles for a couple of months. I get a bit twitchy when I have projects languishing for more than a month or so. 

And we got our first substantial snow last night. It looks so pretty! As much as I prefer a warmer climate, I figure that if it's going to be cold it is much better for there to be snow. Without it, all is gloomy and grey.
You might also like:
Why I Love Homeschooling
keeping warm
creating
Linkwithin