 (The snow squall at its finest. Could hardly see the trees in our front yard.)


Well, today I am sick. Sick in bed, in fact. With what seems to be the most lovely influenza. (Said with a major air of sarcasm.) In truth, my body is aching, my back feels like it might split in half, my chest hurts, I'm coughing non-stop, and I'm oh-so-tired and weak. Blah. I just feel plain miserable. I think that the flu is a bit like labor in that you forget just how horrible it is until you're in the midst of it again.

And in the midst of this flu bout, I am so very thankful that my kids are old enough to make it through the day fairly independently. They got their own breakfast, Ian did his schoolwork, they're taking care of the puppy, all while mommy is in bed with a heating pad on her back for both the warmth and to soothe the body aches. I did manage to drag myself out to the kitchen and make up plates for their lunch. They could have done it themselves, but I really wanted to make sure they ate something nutritious.

And another thing I'm thankful for is that I have a warm, comfortable house to be sick in. I couldn't imagine not having the comforts of my own home while feeling like this. I have my laptop, my Kindle, and my knitting all right here beside me in my warm, soft bed. Those things are good for diverting and distracting my mind. And my warm feather duvet is good for keeping me toasty in the midst of the chills. And this book on Audible is holding my fascination and attention quite well.

We got another snowstorm over this past weekend. Saturday dropped somewhere around eight inches or so of snow (maybe more?) There were periods of complete white-outs which made me very thankful that we didn't have to go anywhere that day. Then we got more snow on Sunday and again yesterday morning. I have to admit that the Farmer's Almanac was right when they predicted a very frigid, long, and cold winter. I woke up  to a thermometer reading of -10 degrees this morning. Brrr. I was really hoping that they had predicted incorrectly. But, alas, I guess there are only two things to be done in this situation: 1. Loathe it and be miserable or 2. Embrace it and make the best of it. 

Midi and Molly are finally getting along. They actually spend a lot of time playing together. It's really cute. And Midi is now bigger than Molly. I'm astounded at how much she has grown in the short week in which we have had her. House-training is coming along fairly good. Molly is helping to keep her in her place in typical older sister fashion although there have been a few fatalities (a basket of mine, a plastic lizard of the kids'.) But that's part of having a puppy. She seems to be a quick learner and she's definitely a snuggler. I love that. Molly is a snuggler. In fact, Molly is my little nap buddy. She gets so excited when she hears me say, "Molly, wanna take a nap with me?" (Because, yes indeed, I do take naps fairly frequently.) She hops up and curls up beside me and keeps me warm.

And my dear chickens are definitely looking forward to spring and warmer temps. And they are most definitely looking forward to seeing green and brown. They do not like the snow. In fact, that last picture there is pretty much how you'll find them on a day such as this - in the coop, huddled up together.

Since I know that this frigid "Arctic" air is impacting a majority of the country, I will send everyone blessings for warmth and health. And if you're under the weather as I am, I will tell you what my mom told me this morning. Stay inside. :) 

Have a blessed day!