Blog posts seem to be so few and far between. Part of the reason for that is because I've been busy learning a new crafting skill. Spinning!!!

This is something I've desired to learn for a few years. Lily and I recently went to our town's annual folk festival, and, while there, we visited the booth with the spinning demonstrators. I ended up talking to them about my alpacas and, in the process, found out that the woman demonstrator lived about five minutes from our home. What a blessing from God! She is now working with me, teaching me how to process my own alpaca fiber and to spin.

The wheel in the pictures is hers, on loan to me until I save enough to buy my own wheel. This was the first wheel that she learned on as well ~ single treadle, traditional flax wheel. I'm still researching and trying to decide if I want a traditional saxony wheel or a more modern, upright, castle wheel.

I am just so thankful to be learning this skill! It has been frustrating at times, and is so much more difficult to do than what it looks when the experts do it! In desperation I texted Jean the other night asking how long it takes to actually produce a yarn that is worth using. She laughed in understanding. But like all things worthwhile, the time I invest in practicing and learning will be very beneficial in the end.

I want to learn to spin, therefore, I will persevere and it will eventually all come together.

That's my spin on most things in life. Anything that you really want to do can be learned with patience and hard work. It's definitely something I have found true in my own life. I stopped letting fear of failure hold me back a few years back. I've given myself plenty of room for error, knowing full well that there will be failures (big and small) when attempting something new.

You'll never get good at something if you don't drop that basketful of fear and at least start.

So, yeah, my yarn is pretty lumpy and bumpy. I still don't have drafting down perfect. And I still have the desire to curse in frustration at times (just being honest), but I'm moving in the right direction, taking at least fifteen minutes a day to sit at the wheel and practice.

It will come as all things do when they are pursued with perseverance. 