On that day tell your son, 'I do this because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.' {Exodus 13:8 NIV}




Passover commences today. Though not of Jewish descent, our little family will be observing the Passover with a Seder tonight. Our youngest children have participated in Seders at our church in years past, but this will be the first time we have one here at home. I'm planning on this becoming a new Holy Week tradition for our family.

So why observe Passover? Well, of course, we will not be observing it to the same extent as the Jewish community will be. However, I believe that it is very important to learn about a custom that even our Lord practiced when He was here on this earth. And Passover is really so symbolic of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

We first learn about the Passover in the Old Testament book of Exodus. Here we find the Israelites (the Jews), God's chosen people, being held as slaves to the Egyptians. They were severely mistreated, beaten, and forced to labor in horrid conditions. 

God had sent Moses before Pharaoh, demanding that the Israelites be set free. What follows are the ten plagues, each plague in response to Pharaoh's hardened heart and refusal to free God's people. However, the tenth and last of the plagues was the death of the Egyptian first-born. And this is where Passover was first practiced...

God instructed His people to sacrifice a lamb. This spring lamb's blood was then painted on the doorposts of the Israelites' homes. This blood was a sign to the Spirit of the Lord to pass over that house, leaving all inside unharmed and well. 

And this significant act of God was then passed on from generation to generation, in remembrance of God sparing the lives of the Jewish first-born. And it became one of the annual feasts recognized by the Jewish people.

Now as believers, we no longer have to rely on the offer of sacrifices. Christ offered the final sacrifice of blood for atonement of sins when He was crucified. His death, His bloodshed, was done out of love, willingly, to save all who believe and call upon His name.

I've deliberately been focusing on God's sacrifice during this time of Lent. And I have found this to be so encouraging, so freeing. To remember the immeasurable depths of His love for me fills me up in a way that nothing else can. It fills me with such a sense of gratitude and wonder. No matter what goes on in this life, no matter how things turn out, no matter how difficult some moments can be, God loves me unconditionally and immeasurably. And my days here on this planet are to prepare me for an eternity with Him.


Behold the Lamb Easter Wreath