These two boys of mine love football. Sergei was a soccer fanatic when he first came to America, but now he's all about American football. In fact, he's skipping out on soccer season in the fall so he can play football at the high school. I really never thought that would happen! :)

Last week, Sergei and Ian really enjoyed the few warm days when they could go out and play football together. They were both disappointed to wake up to the eight inches of snow we got overnight. But that didn't stop these two. They bundled up in their snowpants, coats, gloves, and hats and played football in the snow.

All of these pics were taken through the back door - unlike my children, I am a big wimp and prefer to stay in the warmth and coziness of my home! :)


On a completely other note, I had one of the most amazing God-sightings happen to me a couple of weeks ago. There's this blog that I used to read all the time, Prairie Flower Farm. Well, I hadn't visited the site since before Ukraine because, quite honestly, I really didn't have much time to visit any blogs during our transitional period after we returned to America.

So I got on her blog for the first time since pre-Ukraine a couple of weeks ago, and she had posted about how her son and daughter-in-law, Tonya, were in the process of adopting the boy that they had hosted over Christmas. So I commented on her blog about how we had just adopted from the Sumy region of Ukraine over the summer. She commented back on my blog to contact her right away at her email address.

So I tried writing her back but my emails kept getting returned back to me. I was getting so frustrated! I did a little more researching on her blog, back through the posts she had posted when this little Ukrainian guy, Vitaliy, was there in Kansas with her son's family. And I thought, "Boy does that little guy look familiar to me." Then, brace yourselves here, I realized that I had met that cute little guy when we were in Ukraine adopting Sergei! Here's a pic of me giving him a temp. tattoo...

He's the one in the green shirt! Right away I commented back on Linda's blog that I had met their Vitaliy and I told her to call me. Which she did that night, but I was already in bed. Boohoo! But her daughter-in-law, Tonya, called me the next day and we had a wonderful conversation about Vitaliy, Sergei, adoption, Ukraine, the whole process, etc.

So what's the point of this? I constantly stand amazed at how good my God is. What are the chances of this happening? It was not chance at all, dear ladies! It was a divine appointment arranged before the creation of the world by my big, great, powerful Father in Heaven!
Now I feel so blessed to be in contact with Tonya, another sister in Christ, who has been called into the ministry field of adoption. It is such a sacred and holy blessing!

Of course the cost of adoption is very steep, so if God lays it on your heart to do so, you may make a donation to the Stubbs family through Linda's blog (click the "donate" button on the right sidebar). I know that you do not know this family, but I can speak from experience that every little donated penny that comes in is such a blessing to an adoptive family! Such a blessing! And if you can't donate, I know that the family would covet your prayers for them!

Have a blessed weekend!
Amber