21st July 2015


It was 2.30am, up I got for my regular trip to the toilet! 
I was ready to go back to bed when all of a sudden water from somewhere gushed out, my heart sank. 
I ran to my mothers room to tell her "I think my waters have broken" And up she leaped from her deep sleep to come and check. Although it was only a tiny bit on the floor we didn't actually believe it was my waters so she told me to stop being paranoid and go back to sleep. So off I went back to bed - barely slept properly - I was so scared in case I would wake up in chronic pain and my baby would fall out. 5 hours later, my boyfriend woke up for work. This time I was already up before him to which I told him what had happened when I went to the toilet. As he was ready to leave I was already on the phone to the hospital who then told me to come up to the hospital ASAP! Lucky for him he got a day off work, so off I went to get showered and ready to go up to the hospital to get checked over and to see if it was actually my waters. 

Here I am in the "Adau" unit where you go to be checked over by midwives. As soon as I got to the desk to check myself in, the young lady, who was on the desk at the time, told me to take a seat through the corridor and someone will see me shortly. As I sat down the lady from the desk came over to me to hand me a pot to do a urine sample; by now being 39 weeks pregnant I was more than used to these annoying weekly urine tests! Anyway they sent of my sample to the lab apparently from the urine sample they can tell if your waters have broken or not. Whilst my sample had been sent off, I was taken into the ward where I would be examined by another midwife on duty. She asked me a few questions about what I experienced and checked my blood pressure and felt my stomach, everything was fine thank god! The midwife wrote down the results in my blue book and told me to undress myself so she can examine my cervix whilst I was undressing she went off to pick up my urine sample. Within 3 seconds, I heard her running round the corner shouting "Paris! ..Paris! Forget that put your clothes back on we are having a baby today! We are going to the labour ward now!" I looked over to my boyfriend tears filling up in my eyes wondering what is going on, is everything okay, is my BABY okay??!! So I got my clothes on as quick as possible.  The midwife pulled round the curtains and explained that there is a trace of meconium in the sample. Meconium is where the baby is distressed and poops inside your womb! In most cases it can be quite dangerous and usually most hospitals take no hesitation and opt in for a Cesarean.

Here I am, walking to the labour ward in Milton Keynes General Hospital which I didn't ever in a million years want to do! Milton Keynes have such a bad reputation with delivering babies and my mother has had 2 losses within the last 10 years and because of that, Milton Keynes was never an option for me! But with the way things turned out I had no other option but to give birth here. Even though the day before I gave birth a baby had sadly passed away due to the lack of poor services in the labour ward in Milton Keynes! I knew for a second my mother would definitely not be able to come into the labour ward she went through such a horrid time with her last pregnancy which I never expected her to. But I really needed my mum. I was horrified of birth and going through with the pain without my mother being at my side, although I had my boyfriend there my mum knows me best! I rang my mum to tell her the news and she immediately left work. Within an hour or so she was up there with me, room 9 where she once was 7 years ago in that same small room. It was now 12pm, lunch time, I was waiting to be seen by the doctor to know what was going to happen. Within the next half hour, another doctor on duty came round to tell me that the doctor on call has had to rush into theatre as there was only 1 doctor working the shift. Surprising, I know. She then told us we wouldn't be waiting too long. And she was right within the next 30-40 minutes the doctor came round to me and told me the plan of the day! 

I was right all along! My waters did break although it wasn't my front waters but my back waters. Which I never knew we had! So they needed to break my waters, even though my back ones had gone at 2.30am that morning, I was contracting only slightly not enough that I could feel them, but the heart monitor was picking the contractions up! By 4pm I was put on the hormone drip; this is where it starts off your labour and controls your contractions. The machine goes all the way up to 90ml, and it gets turned up higher every hour!

My midwife that was looking after me that day, got all the equipment to set up the hormone machine and attached the needle to my arm (I hate needles and anything in my arm!) I had to turn away. She didn't do it properly as blood came pouring out all over the floor like a hose pipe. I felt weak and weazy I thought I was going to pass out so she handed me some water and carried on with the hormone drip. Once I was all wired up, she had put me on 10ml to start with. I was so scared to think my contractions are being controlled by a machine and I can't stop them and I don't know when they are going to come. As it got later and later, I had yet to feel my contractions, eventhough the machine was printing out that I was contracting. Well I never felt them what's so ever! I was amazed and thought labour is so easy!! I'm going to be so great delivering my daughter. Time was ticking me, my mum and my boyfriend were just looking at each other bored, tired and hungry. So my boyfriend went to go get us all pizza and munchies because who knows I could be in labour for hours! Even days! Never knew getting pizza from dominos took so long! Anyway he was back - not only was he back be ordered he the wrong bloody pizza! Haha! Men aye? So he went off to get something else (me and mom don't like cheese. Bizarre I know yet we still, have pizza except without cheese!) this time he took even longer and by then I was on 50ml and was starting to feel some of the contractions! Bearable though, so I wanted to try out the pregnancy ball as it helps with pain and bringing on the labour. There I went bouncing away, watching Eastenders not feeling a thing. I mean it did help a lot because not at all did I feel a twinge! Hours went past again, gosh! The hours seemed like minutes whilst being on that hormone machine, so they upped the dosage again! 

Finally we was getting somewhere when I started to actually feel the contractions and they were very frequent. My mom reached out for the gas and air; it was disgusting! But within a few intakes I was on cloud 9, never have I laughed so much in my life. It was so funny I was just taking gas and air for the fun of it and trying not to fall off the pregnancy ball at the same time. I was on the ball for a good couple of hours, to which my legs started to ache and hurt causing me to put the gas and air back and climb back on the bed. It was like an obstacle course, having so many machines and wires attached to you and trying to climb the bed without pulling the wires out! Anyway, I managed to get back on the bed and I just plonked my heavy weight on the bed and "POP" went my waters. At this time I never knew what was happening I leaped up almost breaking my neck and out came water/blood I was so scared and weazy of seeing so much blood to which, I collapsed. Luckily, my mum was behind me so she caught me before I fell to the floor. She screamed "HELP!" And in came two midwives to help carry me onto the bed. My boyfriend wasn't back yet, my mum quickly rang him telling him that I was in labour and that he needs to come now! 

I remember waking up seeing three heads in front of me calling my name. So they sat me up and within seconds of my waters breaking, I felt the most excruciating pain ever, it was so painful that I collapsed again! I woke up screaming, I think.  The midwife knew to go and get me pethidine. I remember my mum demanding the epidural because I couldn't handle the pain, there we go again another contraction and off I was.. 

I collapsed again! My boyfriend arrived and chucked the food on the side, running to my side grabbing my hand. By the time the midwife had gone to get the doctor to come and give me the epidural, I had contracted over 30 times and after every contraction I collapsed. The doctor arrived and sadly explained to me that I would not be able to have any Pain relief as it is too dangerous due to me collapsing after every contraction, because if I were to move I'd become paralyzed, they said I wasn't in control of myself and they don't want to risk it. By then I was screaming ever so loud. The whole labour ward heard.

I remember shouting "I need to push" & the young midwife telling me no I don't I haven't fully dilated! But she was wrong! As I started to push she quickly checked my cervix and she yelled "oh my god I can feel your baby's head, you can push Paris." So there I was, pushing and pushing trying to take control of the contractions but I couldn't. I was begging them to please let me have something even gas and air but they refused because I still kept collapsing. I wanted to give up then and there. I physically couldn't bare it any longer! My mum and boyfriend were trying to calm me down but I just wasn't focusing, I couldn't. I felt as if my body was going to split in half. Each time I was contracting I was pushing but I felt as if I wasn't getting anywhere because once I stopped pushing I felt the head slide back up. It was so frustrating! The pain was indescribable! I didn't even want to push, the pain was that terrible!

The midwife said "Paris one more push and your baby's head will be out". I was so tired and hot, I thought to myself how am I going to do this. But either way I had to go through with this. How else will my baby get out?! I took a mouth full of ice cold water and a deep breath before starting to push. It  was as if I was on fire but I kept deep breathing and within minutes her head was out. The relief I felt, I was estatic because I knew I was almost done, the burning sensation was over. All was left were a few more pushes. And they helped me with the rest. With one last push. the midwife slowly pulled her out!

My Princess was born at 9:59PM on July 21st 2015, weighing a healthy 8lbs 3oz. 
Monaè Aaliyah Kay JMills.