For the past few weeks I've been so so I'll, just generally in pain and feeling like death!
Constantly feeling light headed, dizzy, stomach cramps and just generally really unwell.
Went on for weeks!

Never did I think it was because I was pregnant.
People are quick to make comments on how I've fallen pregnant so soon but they don't actually
Know the full story.

No I didn't know I was pregnant, I was on the mini pill; any mother that has given birth should know at your 6 week check it is vital you get contraception due to falling pregnant again. (That's unless they want to) but no that wasn't the plan for me anyway. So I was given the mini pill because I was still breastfeeding monaè and apparently that's the only contraception you can take whilst breastfeeding.

So no I had no idea, I still had my periods.. As usual even though with breastfeeding some people may not get the same regular periods some don't even have a period. Unfortunately I was one of the ones that still had a period! So I never ruled out pregnancy because I never had morning sickness or any signs of pregnancy! I never even had morning sickness at all with monaè anyway.

I didn't feel pregnant so I just never assumed I was. I told my health visitor as she comes out to check on monaé and myself; and she said do a test just in case I swore to her, my mum and everyone there's no point me taking one because I knew I wasn't! Anyway she kept nagging me to do one.. So I did.. To prove to her I wasn't. And the test came back negative so i was right.


As the weeks went on I began to feel so bad that I couldn't get out of bed and to look after monaè daily was so hard to do, I wasn't eating I wasn't getting up out of bed, I just couldn't do anything I literally felt so so I'll I had no idea what was happening. The pain got so bad one night I had to call the ambulance and they came out and took me straight into a&e to be assessed.

3 hours waiting they examined me and did blood tests, urine samples everything and still nobody said about pregnancy.. They then began to do a external examination because the cramping was so bad they said it could be due to me giving birth they wanted to check if everything was okay. So they began to do that, it was so so painful.. The doctor went out to grab another doctor to come and take another external on me as she found something, I was so worried thinking what the hell is this?

There was a lump in my uterus. Yet they don't know what it is. They sent me away and treated it as urgent so they sent me out a ultrascan to take further action as they haven't a idea what it is.

Few days later I got my letter through.. So I went to the appointment and they did further tests and examinations.. Then lastly they wanted to scan me from inside to see my uterus and what the lump could be so not thinking nothing of it or anything just in a mess about what this lump could be the lady stopped over my stomach and said ".. Congratulations Paris Your having twins" I closed my eyes and didn't look up for about 5 minutes.. Then she told me to look at the screen and there, there was two heartbeats 😩 my heart sank I was speechless, upset and confused I didn't say anything. She then printed out the photos and examined me in depth but still couldn't find the cause.

I have now to wait for further examinations to see what really is the issue .. And obviously now on top of that.. I've got twin babies. That I had no idea about. I'm almost 3 months and hadn't a clue!

Now to wait for my further examinations to find out about my lump..

This is truly a blessing but I am very shocked.
I wasn't planning on having anymore kids but this is the outcome.
God has obviously gave me twins for a reason.
Although I was upset and devastated about the situation, everything happens for a reason.
Monaè and the twins will be close in age; it'll be so hard
Anybody that has had twins or has them in their families knows the struggle.
But it is what it is.


Take note; not all contraception is 100% I conceived on the mini pill and now 3 months pregnant with twins.