I wanted to write about this because it's sooooo common for many people not only young but adults too.

For me it started in my teen years, i always isolated myself from everyone at school and I kept myself to myself, still till this day I do too. I've never been the sociable type I've always been shy and quiet. Obviously as I got older that changed. But from a young age I had many haters and people bullying me.

And I felt as if I had no one.. we are in a world where people will hate you for the littlest things and majority of it was down to jealousy which I have no idea what there ever was to be jealous of. I wasn't a horrible person I wasn't rude I was never mean nothing. But I was hated for things that are so petty. I.e if I had new clothes, different hair styles, boyfriends. All the dumb petty shit.

The bullying put me down a lot to were I suffered severe depression. I have low self esteem I have no confidence Etc. You would never understand want someone's going through unless you have been through it too.

Many people would say I'm stupid why am I depressed and why do I hate myself do much? Your mixedrace, tall, slim' & "beautiful" you could be a model. But when your so used to being put down all you believe is the shit things people would say about you.

This then made me isolated myself so much I never had a life I never wanted to go out and I never went out. I would go to school even though I never wanted to.. I would pretend I'm sick or make excuses just so I didn't have to go in. And then when I was at home I would lock myself away in my room. All people my age was always out I never was.

I hated life.. I didn't want to be here.. I had many suicidal thoughts.. I even once attempted to take my own life. But my sister had caught the letter. No one ever understands the feeling when your so down and depressed and feel so worthless and have no one to speak to because whenever you speak to someone they never actually understand. Anyway I went to get help. And I was referred to councilling.. which helped a bit but not a lot. Because I was getting older and there was no solution so the depression and anxiety just grew.

Many months I'd go councilling and Have regular check ups.. I was too young to be put on tablets so I had to manage it myself which was hard at a young age. I then got myself out of education and got a job and that started helping me a little.. then I got into a job I loved and then I started feeling relief. But this was all down to therapy and talking about things.

I find that writing about what I've been through or my problems help me with how I'm feeling. When I gave birth to Monaé I suffered deeply with post natal depression and that's normal for first time mums but that was manly to do with my abortion it was too soon.. and everything, hormones sparked up again. I was at my worst again when she was born.. and at the time I was old enough to take medication although I hate medication and relying on tablets I just took the chance.. and I did for about a year up until the twins was around 6months old I was on antidepressants I was embarrassed by it. But I look back and think.. it's life most people go through these things.. and having these 3 babies in my life has made me happier and made my depression go. I'm still very anxious about many things. But those tablets helped me and these kids they give me the strength everyday.

I'm not going to lie and say it's easy because it's not there are several days I have days to myself and my depression comes back and I cry and don't eat and sleep. But as I've got older I've been able to manage it. And I've found my way of coping and that's by writing everything down.

Don't be ashamed speak out.. find what helps for you. We are all human nobody is perfect 💖