It all started once I gave birth to my kids..

I saw another side in their dad that I had never had seen which if I had seen it God forbid he would never have been my children's father.

I'm an open honest person just because I know how it feels to be alone and I want to help anybody that is currently in the situation I was in.

LADIES please please do not keep your children's father around if he is abusing you do not do it for the sake of the children because it is not what they need to see nor the environment they need to be brought up in!

Few many months I felt bad and said to myself they need to have heir dad around because it will mess up their heads when they are older and it wouldn't be nice for them to go from me to him every other week etc. So I was abused physically, mentally and emotionally up until early this year.


It all got to much when I was getting hurt and my kids were in the same room watching it happen and they was screaming crying running away.. I had to take all hits and grabs like it didn't bother me just to make them think it wasn't real but it didn't matter they knew what they saw was what it was. Neighbours would call the police, every week family would call the police ahe would just keep coming back!

My items would get broken, smashed and damaged. Me and my family would be threatened by him and his family members. But never did I stop the kids seeing their side of the family not that it even mattered because none of them bothered anyway.

Anyone I would talk to whoever would come around the kids would be threatened and sent abuse messages to from my children's dad to the point I no longer have people wanting to be around us. I took them to get their hair trimmed in a barber shop few weeks back and the boy almost got beat up by him and said not to touch the twins again.

I made the decision to come out of the relationship and be a single mum I was practically one anyway I never received help, financially anything so everything I was doing I was doing alone. I was just being abused and controlled by my kids dad and bullied to the point he made me feel so useless.

Everyone would tell me leave leave but no one understands how hard it is to break away from abusive relationships. I have 3 young kids and most definitely need the extra hand so it was either continue with that life and let my daughter grow up and think that's what a man does to you and my boys to grow up and think that's what you do to women or for me to walk away.. So that's what I have done.

For those wondering why he isn't around etc that is the truth.
We are all woman and we don't deserve to be treated that way.. And don't think because we have children we most definitely can find a better man to father figure the kids and to be a better husband to us.

I have been through hell and back in the space of to years and I am in such a happy place right now. & that's all from speaking out and breaking away from all the bad in the past.

Me and my kids deserve better.. And we will get better,
The only way is up
💖🎀

(This blog is only short and simple as didn't want to go through to much details but if anyone one is experiencing this please break away because your kids can be taken away from you because of a heartless man and you can end up very hurt and potentially killed)

Feel free to message me for any questions and advice ✨
You are not alone x