As you already know i already had a child, who was under the age of 1 after having birth to twin boys; i found it so overwhelming.

My midwife had referred me to this twin group organisation thing. Where for 2 days I would get help from a nanny who specialise in twins.

I was 50/50 but i went ahead and accepted the help. And she came to my house first thing on a tuesday. She came with routines for all 3.. and how to manage them etc. We onlt got through half a day and had to leave it there. Because the twins were playing up. They were only 8 weeks old, but i knew something about them wasnt right.

The lady left early for me to sort them out for bath and bed. But they skipped there bath as they was so miserable and wasnt right. They both had a temp higher than 40.c and was roasting hot. Everytime i would pick romelle up or even touch a finger on him he would scream as if his bones were broken? I couldnt understand why. Romario just continously crying and making grunting noises the whole day. The nanny before she went had said its normal for babies that have reflux. But i knew that it wasnt right. The whole day romario and romelle was acting this way. Just constantly crying and being sick.

I called my mum, she tried to calm me down i gave them medicine and tried to settle them as well as have my daughter. With me i google everything, they say you shouldnt but i did. My gut instinct knew exactly what was wrong with them! I typed their symtoms into google and up came meningitis. A couple of more symtoms came up which i didnt even take any note to. I then did the glass test and the light test. Each time i put the light on they would scream.

Enough was enough i was panicking because after 20 minutes of medicine their temp was getting higher its supposed to bring it down. My mum called 101 and the man on the phone heard them he especially heard romelle fighting for breath so he sent out the rapid response. Within 10 minutes they were here.

They came and did observations their observations were shocking fine just a high temp and very unsettled babies. They was just going to leave it there. Until they noticed romelles breathing was so bad you could see his ribs. So they took them to a&e. And they were very unsettled and screaming. As soon as they got into the room the doctors and nurses picked them up out of their carseats and laid them down. I was on my own at the time all these nurses and doctors running to my babies. And i heard the doctor shout quick these babies are very poorly grab some help. Loads of buttons were beeping and in and out doctors were running.

They told me to step outside.. i called my mum to get here asap. Within 20 minutes of being outside the room seeing all the doctors doing tests and putting machines all over them. They came out to speak to me.

In my head i knew what i was going to hear but i didnt want to believe it. The doctor came and sat me down and said that they are both very poorly they have "meningitis" i just nodded my head. I knew it all along. I was in shock. I didnt know how to take it. I didnt know what to do. They were screaming in pain they couldnt bare any lights because it gives them headaches same as to loud noises. They were boiling hot. They were in so much pain and had 10 machines on each of them with high dosage of antibiotics and medication going through there poor little hands.

I wish it was me laying in that bed.. the pain they went through for 9 whole days. Test after test. Medication every hour. No food no drink no nothing. I sat by there side all night and day. They was so poorly i couldnt even touch them :(

Not many people recover from meningitis. It is such a serious thing. I am so grateful to everybody at the hospital who saved their lives. It was the most hardest thing to go through alone. And i also thank my mum for being there all along with me. From night to day she was at my side making sure they were okay.

They are stars in my eyes. To be that young and have to experience what they did and come out the other side i am so grateful. Meningitis has many complications from hearing to seeing and ability to do things, but my boys were so lucky that it didnt touch them like that. They are amazing and are doing so well right now. 

Although they get ill alot now from colds, to sore throats and sickness bugs etc due to having suffered from meningitis i was told they have no immune system so they are constantly catching anything and everything. 

But i am so grateful they came out the other side. Seeing them how they were for those horrible days broke my heart!

Always trust your gut instinct - a mother always knows 💙