It was November 2014 I had been trying for a baby since my previous incident (an abortion)
When I first met my children's dad I fell pregnant 4 months into the relationship I most definitely was not ready for a baby I worked full time in a job I loved which I studied for 3 years.. I had just got my brand new first car, life was good for me.

Then I missed my period.. I took a test and I was pregnant. I was in severe shock I didn't know what to do I felt sick.. numb and scared! I was 50/50 i didn't want to tell my mum as I was scared and I was not about that life. I didn't want kids till I was almost 30. If you ask anyone that knew me including family they would tell you straight Paris would be the last person I'd thought would have kids! And it was true.

Anyway long story short. I thought through with the decision for a few weeks .. and being young Nd confused still then I don't think I thought through well enough. I just knew the time was not right because I wasn't with my children's dad for long enough time to start a family it was all new in the relationship and a baby is for life I don't want to just be a failure and rush into things because you cannot predict the future and nothing lasts for ever (literally)

So I aborted my baby. At the time in my head I thought it was for the best I had so much going for me I didn't want to start that sort of life just yet I wanted to be engaged, married have a house all that malarkey before I have kids (too late now 🙄) And I went ahead and had the surgery. Being caught up in all these emotions I came out balling my eyes out. I began to fall into deep depression I hated life I hated myself. I didn't want to live anymore. I couldn't believe I did what I did. For weeks I beat myself up over it. I quit my dream job.. I didn't eat.. sleep.. drink. Nothing my mum took me away on holiday to Egypt.. and still I was suicidal. I was a wreck.

All I wanted was my baby back.. i never knew once it was gone I'd feel the way I did. I never even met it before and I was completely heartbroken I knew I wasn't ready but I didn't think I'd ever feel the way I did.

I grieved for weeks.. and then 3 months later I fell pregnant with my daughter Monaé. We both grieved so much and talked about everything, planned everything. And it was November exactly 3 months after the abortion I had the chance to fall pregnant again.

I was so happy I could've ran a mile.. I was blooming! Could not stop smiling. As soon as I found out I was pregnant.. I booked my appointment in the doctors.. I went baby shopping.. I looked and what I'm going to buy him/her I did all what normal first mums do.

I was sent my first scan at 12weeks.. I was so excited, I went to that. Saw my baby first time on the screen and I was just amazed my tiny little size 8 body has a baby inside.. it's a crazy feeling. I never had morning sickness with Monaé.. I never had nothing. I just had bizarre cravings like hot peppers and fizzy coke from McDonald's.

I'm a beautician and worked in salons and spa's doing intense work.. so I had to go part time up until 6 months because it literally killed me.. and I didn't want anything happening to my baby.. I worked my ass of for her to have the nicest things. And at 6 months I had to leave my job.. and get a job in an office because I kept bleeding.. due to so much stress and over working myself and all the strain of my job. I was in and out of hospital and she was fine thank god. I just had to take it easy.

It got to nearer the end of my pregnancy and I came on maternity leave at the very last month of my pregnancy.. I hated it I hated sitting around being bored and not active.. I always worked from the age of 16 so for me to not be working it was weird. So I pampered myself got my hair done nails done .. rested for time was just being pure lazy.

I left all my big buys to the very end I didn't buy the buggy, cot etc till the very end of my pregnancy. And as I slowly went on in the pregnancy I would buy all the clothes and baby grows etc throughout and I left the buggy etc all till the very end. So then by the time she was due I had it all delivered in time to be put up.

Within having the whole month of no work and on maternity leave I just tried so much to sleep and enjoy my very last days of me being alone.. because once the baby is here that's it, sleepless nights start and you never get rest and you'll never get to do the things you could re being a mum.

The main thing to do is to rest and take things easy.. I worked so hard and was continuously stressed throughout my pregnancy that she came 9 days early. I worked my ass of to give her the best but in reality you don't need to buy all these expensive things because they grow so quick and they end up wearing it a few times and then all the money is wasted. I got Monaé a I can't which came to 950 and she only had it a year.. which was not worth the money at all. It's all for fashion and competition but if I could have done it again I would have spent the money on something else or saved it in a bank for her, because all the money I spent on Monaé she had it for less than a month if that!

💖👑