OKAY SO..

At 8 weeks I stopped breastfeeding, and moved Monaè onto formula.
At the time I thought was the best thing to do as she is a big baby, and she is constantly hungry.


Firstly I started her on Aptamil "Hungry Babies" so far so good, was using it for few weeks until I noticed a rash all over her face' people said this was normal it's called 'milk spots' to be honest I LOVE google and I always GOOGLE everything! and that's what I did, although people including my health care and GP told me they're just milk spots. I knew it was something other than milk spots because these spread all over her face, from face to neck, to her chin, the the back of her neck and ears! Milk spots are a tiny little rash. Anyway it got to 7 days later and the rash was so so bad that she looked awful her face was terrible! So I took her to the hospital and that's when I found out my poorly bubba has had an allergic reaction to this milk! She was only 2 months and a few weeks.
They advised me to change the milk and prescribed me a steriod to apply to her rash daily.

Next day I changed her milk to the milk I was advised by the hospital and they said to change it to the normal Aptamil because the hungry babies formula is way to thick for her. So I went to boots and bought this one. She seemed to like it I mean she's so greedy she will literally drink anything you give her lol! But she didn't seem to like it as much as the first formula. Anyway I knew she couldn't have that one because it just wasn't agreeing with her. So I kept her on this new formula for another couple of weeks, and the same thing accused, except with this one she kept being sick after feeds and even after a few hours of her feeds she kept on just randomly being sick. So back to the doctors I went! Fed up with this, as my baby has had her milk changed twice and still not one formula she can be happy with! Again they said another allergic reaction. But couldn't explain as of why she kept being sick because she is such a healthy chunky weight it isn't an "issue" in their eyes. The doctor then told me to try out yet another formula, there is plenty of options to try he said and as she's very young it is hard to tell of what to suggest.

SMA Gold Comfort - i was nervous and anxious about giving Monaè this milk but this was the longest formula she had ever been on, it's brilliant it helps with wind, so she doesn't get left with bad stomach if there is trapped wind. The constant being sick settled down, the rash was completely gone. Finally I felt at ease to know that my baby is drinking milk and enjoying it just the way she's supposed to. Few more weeks down the line it stopped and went back to having her rash on her cheeks that looked ever so sore and constant vomiting. But she was projectile vomiting to the point it would go through her clothes, my clothes, all over the floor and onto anybody that's around. I would have to change her at least 3-5 times a day! It got beyond ridiculous I just wanted answers! I wanted it sorted out!


Like usual can never get an appointment at your GP, this was important in her case because she was very unsettled and constantly hungry due to always being sick. So I went back to the hospital, for them to finally give me some answers. Monaè is allergic to cows milk and can't drink them. So what happens now? She was prescribed milk specially for her milk allergy by the doctor which means whenever I need milk the docto pr has to prescribe it for us as you can not purchase this. They put her on a formula called Nutramigen? I believe when trying out new formulas you have to be on it for at least 24-48 hours for it to get into your system. But it was only 12 hours of Monaè having it and again the same issue occurred although she had water diarrhoea everytime she drank the formula and just wasn't having any wet nappies so she became very dehydrated I was so so fed up and worried. I had to give her some dioralyte to get her hydrated again as she wasn't herself at all 😓

By now I was so fed up for Monaè constantly changing her milk and feeding her different formulas that were making her feel unsettled and always getting sick. The doctor had NO other option but change the milk for once and for all.. At least that's what I was hoping..

She is on another milk prescribed from the GP called Neocate and again still no good 😔 it's been about a week and abit and she barely goes to the toilet and when she does, it's runny and dark green/black and she's still constantly projectile vomiting? She could just be sleeping and she will just be sick to the point where she is soaking through!

I'm sick of it, I would love to find out what actually is going on but I don't seem to get anywhere. Not with such crap service doctors that don't really know what they're doing.

If anybody has experienced this or have any idea/clue what could be wrong please share and comment as I really want to come to the bottom of this. 


Thank you x