Hey friends!
No baby yet. I'll just get that right out of the way. I WILL tell you I had my delicious Friendly's Reese's Peanut Butter Cup Sundae last night. And DAMN was it good. I will have sexy dreams about it for a while now. But, I'm getting off the point of this message to give you the latest news from the Docs:
I've made NO progress! Woo! I'll put my sarcasm on hold to say that all my stats are the same as last week. NO dilation (tightly closed according to this doctor), 70% effaced, and head kind of high. Poo. Happily, the baby's movement has been crazy today and her heartrate was fab. I'm so glad, because on Tuesday I'd had contractions for over 7 hours and many were painful, but it was false labor. And during the whole day she almost never moved. Just as I was about to go to bed, she finally did several jig-like dances in there which made me feel much better. She moved more yesterday, and now today she's like a party animal. One less thing to worry about!
The doctor told me I will go in for my next NST on Monday and they will check me out...if I've made some progress, they will plan to induce me on Friday morning of next week. If not, I will go in next Thursday afternoon and they will insert Cervadil (a string they insert that has medication to get things started) and I'll sleep the night there, THEN have my induction on Friday morning after some breakfast. So, if Little P. doesn't make her own appearance before then, it looks like Friday May 1st will be the day we get things started! I hope she's born that day too, but I know anything can happen. And, I had previously picked May 1st to be the birth-day (my guess in the family "Little P's Birth-Day Pool")...so obviously I want to win and that is clearly a huge priority. :) I swear I didn't "fix" the game. The doctor told me the days this was to happen and I nodded because I'll do anything to get her out and safely. There was no mention of a pool or anything...I swear! If I'd had a choice I would have screamed "get this shit going TODAY!" I'll keep you all posted if things change, though. One more week!!!
Save
You might also like:
It's Getting Interesting
Mother's Day and the Birth
Noah's Birth
Linkwithin