When we moved here a year ago, one of the biggest selling features for me was the fact that this house had a separate studio space...it's own entrance, a powder room, a kitchenette with granite counters, sink, and cabinets and lots of nice lighting. The previous owner was a massage therapist and reiki practitioner with her own business so I was able to sort of just move right into the space she'd already set up. Before this, I'd always had a little corner somewhere or a space in the cold basement. Now, I'm on the same level of the house as the rest of my family...heat! electricity! running water! windows! There's even a door that locks to the rest of the house so I can work "uninterrupted" (I put that in quotes because when you have kids there's REALLY no such thing, ha!).







 





 It's nice to have my own little space here at home. Truth be told, though, is that it can get lonely. When I left my corporate job to freelance several years ago the first huge adjustment I had to make was working alone without my awesome co-workers. I used to love passing by the cubicles and saying hello...having funny conversations through the day...eating lunch together and sharing funny stories. That all ends when you are home and alone in your own space. No interruptions, no distractions, no banter, no laughter. It can be isolating. Now, Facebook has come along and become my go-to social center through the day...it's my own little water-cooler and line to the outside world. I'm taking care of our kids now, so I'm pretty busy with them most of the time. But, I must say, if I were still freelancing and childless, I would consider renting a shared workspace. Have you heard about these? I've seen many creative freelancers flourish in this relatively new concept. There's a place called WeWork that does provide the perfect sort of atmosphere where people can still freelance but have an actual workplace experience with other people in similar situations. I would love to have other people around to bounce ideas off of, share resources with, laugh with, or just eat lunch with. Being able to work around others is the best part of going away to work (I always thought anyway).
WeWork is a co-working company that does just that...they transform buildings into collaborative workspaces and provide infrastructure, services, events and technology so that entrepreneurs and small start-ups can focus on doing what they love. I think it's such a cool concept. It's also such a great way of finding others to team up with in different specialties.
For now, I'm a work at home Mom and am thrilled to have a studio of my own...and a chance for a little peace and quiet! Who knew?

Check out WeWorks various locations in other major cities. 
Photos by Denise Carty Photography





Save