Happy Friday friends!
Any big plans for the weekend? We'll be busy here and there doing family things. Fun!
In the meantime, I've got some plans for some more stationery designs up my sleeve. I love having new ideas; I get so pumped! They involve papery patterns and an antique ephemera feel. Wee!

I just cleared off my vanity in my bedroom and rearranged things so that I can use the space to get ready in the morning. Handy! We had a few closets through our bedroom that we just turned into ONE closet and a...Master Bathroom! Yay! It's been months in the making and it's almost done. The shower glass goes in next week. I can't wait to show you pictures! In the meantime I'm plotting and planning where all my stuff will go.
Feeling blessed!

See my new phone in the picture? First of all, I had never even really even texted until I got the phone. Talk about behind the times! I had an old phone that I only had on for emergencies. To be honest, I don't even know my phone number. LOL. So, I decided to join the current world and get an iphone 4S. (I opted out of getting the 5). I love it! I've been missing out and am now enjoying Instagram and doing all kinds of fun things. The buttons on the top right of my blog show you the places you can find and follow me. Now, I just have to memorize that phone number...

And finally, I just spent 2 hours searching for my keys. Tearing the house apart. Freaking out, sweating, crying and panicking (I know they're just keys but I needed to get P to school). Chris had them at work in his bag all along. sigh Luckily, he came all the way home with them and brought Paige to her school for me. Better late than never! It was funny, I was so mad at first but when he told me he had them I was so relieved and I immediately felt for Chris. He told me he was so sorry and he felt bad... and in that moment I chose to not give him any hassle for an honest mix up. It always feels good to choose to forgive rather than yell and nag. Next time I make a mistake I know he'll offer me the same. That man is the best.

Enjoy your weekend! Hug the ones you love, ok? See you Monday!

PLEASE NOTE: I HAVE TURNED OFF WORD VERIFICATION IN MY COMMENT SECTION TO MAKE THINGS EASIER FOR EVERYONE. THANKS!
Save