Happy Father's Day Chris!! After we got married, you were no longer just the best boyfriend in the world; you became the best husband in the world! Friends, Chris is such a loving and caring person. He slaves over a hot stove and makes us dinner every night. This is a guy who figured out the recipe for my favorite chili from a restaurant far away just because I loved it...he took a few tries and soon had the perfect blend of ingredients for the pulled-pork chili I would travel hours just to have. He brings me home flowers for the smallest of occasions...cupcakes for the same, or yummy chocolate milk from the local farm stand...He knows just what I like. And while I was pregnant, he would do MORE of this and even surprise me with my cheeseburger cravings when he arrived home...without me even saying I had the craving that day! Since having Paige, he continues to make dinner and even makes me a lunch to eat for the next day so that I don't have to rush around with the little time there is to make it. He booked me for a facial at a local spa last weekend so I could get away and have some time to myself. I can't get over how wonderfully thoughtful he is. Now Chris is the best Daddy. Paige couldn't be luckier to have him as a Dad. He rushes home each day to care for her...to give her dinner and hold her and snuggle with her. He gives her a bath in the evening and lovingly chooses her outfits. He's even come home with little outfits he found for her while shopping for other things! He puts her safely in bed at night after caring for her himself all evening and she always smiles big when he comes home. Yes, she loves her Daddy and I love him too. Happy first Father's Day Chris. You are the light of our lives...the sun in our sky. Not a day goes by where we don't appreciate you and all that you are and all that you do. We love you always.
PS. Happy Father's Day to MY Dad! I've been lucky to have you as my father and now you get to be Paige's Grandpa! It's fatherhood all over again without the stress! :) Much love to you!

Save