Hi friends!
Just wanted to say hello and let you know we are well! I hope you are well too! Not too much new going on...
Paige had her 2 month vaccinations and it went much better than I thought it would! She cried for about a minute after them and then got over it. She never fussed afterward and there were no ill effects. Phew! She's now fully adjusted to her new formula (Similac Sensitive RS) and it's great! MUCH less gas and much less spit up. It's just better all around since she used to cry at various weird times from gas...she'd pull her legs to her chest and yell. Now, that barely happens if at all. And the nipple issue (since the formula was so much thicker we needed to find a larger nipple that worked for her) worked out. We ended up using Dr. Brown's level 2 nipple with a few holes poked in it. Of course, that's for DAYTIME. It was too slow for her at night since her sucking isn't the best when she's tired, so we use an Evenflo nipple in the night time/morning. Geez, it took a while to crack that puzzle. But we did it, and without the help of the dude from The DaVinci Code. And you know what? It's working out great! 2 different nipples and it's going just fine. Paige has been taking great naps all day now so I'm counting myself as lucky. She's still up through the night for her feedings. (she's eating mostly every 3.25 to 3.5 hours) But we made a great change: no more monitor in our room. Her room is up the hall from ours and we can hear her when she calls/cries, but I can't hear the more quiet chatter noises she makes (general fussing). I sleep so much better now and hear her when she really needs something...and it's always cries for food. I can put her down after her feeding and go right back to sleep because I'm not listening to her fusses and squawks of protest...I know she's been fed, burped, cuddled, and changed so she's fine there. I rest so much easier! I never thought I'd be able to put the monitor out of our room, but it's worked out great. I do have our door cracked open a few inches to aid in our hearing, but that's about it. So, that's the baby news around here. I'll be back soon with some more posts about news around here. I hope all is well with you!!!
Save
You might also like:
Before and Now
Couch Potato
Nuts 'n Bolts
Linkwithin