A few weeks ago, Chris was kind enough to record a documentary that aired on PBS called "Mr. Rogers and Me" for me (knowing that Mr. Rogers is a hero of mine). It was incredible! Moreso, it was very inspirational for me and set many ideas in motion (in my head, at least!).  Something Fred Rogers said to the documentary writer really stood out to me: "Deep and simple is so much more essential than shallow and complex." It was said in response to the writer's specific job at MTV.  That phrase seems to have many good uses for inspiration in all aspects of our lives, doesn't it? Give it some thought and see how it can apply to you!
For me, it is a great guide for mothering. Kids not only thrive in simplicity but through forging deep bonding relationships with them. It's not the toys they have, it's the time we spend. I find that the simplest activities hold the most impact. The simpler language is best understood. The simple pleasures are the most enjoyed. The quieter the home, the more smoothly the day goes.
When I allow myself to turn off the outside world and outside distractions (tv, internet, phones and noise) I can focus on my babies and on the kind of mother I most want to be. They know they have my full attention, even if it's more exhausting on my part. But when I feel overwhelmed (and Paige is running around in a nutty ball of fire), I realize it's usually because I am making things too complex...too shallow to have calming impact. The days are long, but the years are short. When I remind myself that this time with them is brief in the scope of life-- I want our time to be special and wonderful--magical things happen. I remember to simplify and everything falls back into place. It's easy to fall out of this practice, but I never beat myself up about it. I just hop back on the horse! By going deep in my bonds with my children, I believe they will become successful and responsible adults who can look fondly back on their childhoods and forge great bonds with others in THEIR lives. And I will have a treasure trove of memories to draw upon. I'm off to get back to it! See you soon!
Save
You might also like:
Mother's Day and the Birth
In progress
Nursery Planning
Linkwithin