Hello everyone! Yesterday I hit my 19 week mark. Soon I'll be halfway through! Thanks so much for everyone's well-wishes and sweet comments on my last post!!!! We are so blessed to have so many wonderful people rooting for us and thinking good thoughts. It really does help a lot! I'm still absorbing the fact that I'm going to have a little girl! It completely blows my mind. She seems to be doing well in there. I've finally started feeling little tiny pokes here and there from inside. Sometimes I feel a bunch at once and other times it's just a poke or two. My experience with it so far has felt exactly like gas bubbles down there...just a lot and more frequent if not a tiny bit more obvious. Like a little finger inside my abdomen is tap-tap-tapping on the window of my organs. Our ultrasound last week was a great milestone for us; what an excitement! The one sketchy thing the doctor told us is that the umbilical cord has only one artery and vein instead of TWO arteries and one vein. But the artery it does have is very large. I guess this can be linked to defects in the kidneys or heart, but she said everything seemed fine with those and she wasn't concerned. It can also be linked to fetal growth issues, but the baby was measuring exactly for my dates. She told me it isn't something that affects the baby later on. She's having us come back soon for another ultrasound when the baby is a touch bigger so she can get a better look at the heart once it's grown a little more...a routine move she says. Overall I'm a little freaked out by it, but I think it's natural to be. I mostly feel confident, though, since the doctor seemed quite relaxed about it. I've learned that I can only panic so much in one pregnancy. I've also learned that if the doctor isn't worried then I won't be worried. (Easier said than done, but I'm getting better!) Because I have ZERO control over this, there is no point in flooding my system and Little P with worry-chemicals. It's a hard pill to swallow, but nature has to take its course one way or another and I'm just along for the ride. On a fun note, I've been planning the baby's nursery and have finally made our first baby purchases! We probably won't begin the process of setting up the room until at least January (when we will clean out the room and paint the walls...and hopefully put in a hard-wood floor) It's been fun plotting, planning, and figuring out what everything will be. More on that this week!
Save
You might also like:
15 weeks pregnant
30 Weeks
17 Weeks pregnant
Linkwithin