Dear Little P,
You are 14 months old today!
I must say, you have grown leaps and bounds in the past month. You went from a fast crawl to suddenly walking all over the place. All by yourself! I couldn't help but note that you didn't want us to coach you or help you in any way...you wanted to try it by yourself. Your independent streak really showed itself during this! You still refuse to hold our hands. But, if you are in a new situation, you will stand right by our side and cling to our clothing until you feel brave enough to wander off on your own again. I hate to break it to you, but once we start venturing out and about with those feet of yours, you will be FORCED to hold our hands for safety. Just sayin'.
Aside from all the walking and scurrying going on, you have learned to throw your arms up in the air (baby is SOOOOOO big!) and you're starting to give high-fives. Last week you lifted the bottom of my shirt up so you could inspect my bellybutton more closely. (I think bellybuttons are gross overall. Mine used to be kind of cute but now it looks all weird ever since my pregnancy demolished my stomach wall which I now have to suck in and squeeze for photos and public outings. Ahem.) I said "That's Mama's bellybutton." You began to periodically lift my shirt to see it ever since. Sheesh. I'm self conscious about it, you know? I can now even say "Where is Mama's bellybutton?" and you will scurry across the room to me just so you can lift my shirt and point it out. I'll forgo my bellybutton issues to know that you actually understand what I'm saying! You still don't get that you have one too...despite my best efforts to show it to you. And finally, aside from "Dadda" and "Mmmmammmma" you can say "Duck" when you see pictures of them and you can say "Quack Quack Quack" (although when you say it, it sounds like "Cack Cack Cack."
I have been having so much fun with you. I know I get tired a lot, but it's because of all the exciting things we are sharing! Swimming at the pond across the street, going for nice morning walks, spending family time with Daddy, going to the park and swinging, visiting with friends, sharing ice cream, splashing at the water table in the yard, visiting Nana and Grampa, going to family birthday parties...our days are full of love and discovery. Seeing your more constant smile and the delight in your eyes each day brings me so much joy and pride...my heart almost bursts. I feel so lucky to be allowed to help and watch you grow. What a gift! You are truly my treasure. I never knew this kind of life could be possible; and it is YOU that makes it so.
Love you always and forever more,
Mama
Save