Dear Little P.,
Hi sweetie! Well, as you can see, this is my first letter to you as you are now here in the world with us instead of in my tummy. What a grand month it has been! This first month of your life has been an amazing roller-coaster of emotions for your Daddy and for me and we are thrilled that we have learned so much. And you're learning every day too! You've met a lot of your family and many of our friends...you seem to fit right into things! But it's hard not to like you...being so friendly, sweet and kind and all. It doesn't hurt that you are cute too. :)
Of course, your birth was amazing, but the following few weeks have been such a whirlwind of getting to know you better. We've been working hard to learn how you like to be soothed, how you like to be held, how you like to lay to sleep, what songs you like sung to you and other important details to your current livelihood. We've also spent a good amount of time cleaning up your spit-up, vomit, poop, pee, and who knows what .I guess you haven't lived until you've been pooped on, peed on, puked on, and gagged on all in one day. It's ok because it's all part of YOU. I am happy all your functions are in order! As of the other day, you've started to look at me while I hold you. It's so precious to be able to stare into those big eyes of yours as you check me out. You like to stare at my hair a lot...probably because it is frizzy and crazy most of the time. Having hair like a Fraggle is proving to be entertaining in the wee hours. You seem to LOVE the wee hours! Midnight to around 2 am is a time you seem to be wiggly and "scream-y." I know that is a time I will not be sleeping and must try to soothe you until it is time for your next feeding. I'm learning to not get upset about this and to look at it as a chance to spend some quality time with you. When you finally relax (after doing the 4 or 5 "s-es" such a swaddling, shooshing, swaying, etc.) I love to trace the soft outlines of your face with my eyes...to drink in every rounded curve of your cheeks and eyelashes. I want to memorize your face as it is now and keep it with me as a treasure. The moment will disappear into ashes, but my memory can hold you longer. I love you more and more with each and every moment and miss you more and more as each passes. It's a tidal push and pull of love I've never known before.
I'm excited about your second month of life as it's going to get even better; I'm excited about what time will bring us! I hope you like it here. Please know that your Daddy and I love you more than anything and don't know how we got so lucky that out of all the little girls that God has created we got the BEST one! Thank you for choosing us to be your family.
Save