Dear Noah-Nut,

Several days ago you turned 9 months old and I'm so proud of the sweet boy you are growing into. Your personality is starting to shine and I'm fascinated every day. You are proving to be very sweet, curious but gentle, reserved and friendly all at the same time. You love to be tickled...you love to laugh with your robust chuckle. You love to be left alone to crawl all over the house and explore for yourself. My little adventurer. You seem to take it very seriously and delight in all your discoveries...you'll look up at me and smile when you find something new and exciting.





You had your 9 month check up and you're 22 pounds and 28.5 inches long; if you must know.
You are so relaxed...I can take you anywhere and you just sit happily in your car seat. If I'm holding you, you don't wiggle around and fuss. You happily hang out and look at everything around you. Thank you for making life easy during the day!



You are a great sleeper...you have a nap around 9/9:30 for an hour or so and then another 1.5 hour nap just after lunch. You fit in one more nap from 3:00-4:00 and bedtime by 7. You sleep all night, but wake once to wolf down a bottle (usually anywhere between 3:30-5:30am) and it's back to bed 'till 6:30 or 7. I'll take it!
You love to babble. You've covered la-la-la, ba-ba-ba, ma-ma-ma, na-na-na, and da-da-da...all in various octaves. You've also managed to sprout 2 bottom teeth despite the pain it put you (and the rest of us) in. I must say, those shiny teeth are quite nice and well-earned. Good work!

Noah, you are a dream come true. You are such a special person--a wonderful person. You are my youngest child; my baby so I'm really holding on to the little moments with you that mean the most. Snuggling you soothes my soul. I love to feel your wispy hair on my lips while you drink your bottle. I love to squish and squeeze all your baby-fat rolls...you like a little marshmallow.







I love to giggle with you and dance all around the house together. I sit quietly and touch each of your fingers in wonder; thinking about how God made you so perfect and marvelous. I touch your soft cheeks and look at your twinkly eyes and I know that there is nothing in this world better than this time with you. I am so lucky I've been chosen to be your Mama. We go together like rama lama lama ke ding a de dinga a dong and I can't wait for even more fun. 

 



Thank you for filling my life with so much spirit and love. My heart is full and content.
Just look at that cute bum! :)



Love you always and forever,
Mama



Save