Hi friends! I'm sorry I've been away so long! No, I haven't been giving birth...I've been doing all the things on my "things to do before the baby comes" list. You know, putting baby stuff away, organizing, obsessing over thank you notes, resting, eating cheeseburgers...the necessities. This past Sunday was spent having false labor through much of the day (contractions both painful and non-painful with a side of nausea) so I can't help but wonder if the time is coming soon! I'm already 36 weeks, so she'll be here soon enough anyway, right? There's only 27 days left until my due date. Physically, I'm feeling awful...just in a lot of pain in my hips and pelvic area. I think my pubic bone has separated a little so it cracks at night when I try to roll over. This is not an enjoyable sensation by any stretch and it's not an area I'd ever imagine to generate a cracking sound. I have to say a little prayer before I roll over each time at night because the pain will be bad. BUT, it's all worth it of course. Break both my arms and legs if needed; I will handle it if it means my little one is coming and is ok. Little P checked in well at her latest NST. Her heart response seems to be getting better and better...she's so reactive to her movements. I hope she'll be athletic like her father. I was athletic as a kid, but who knows where that went to. She has a good chance to get his genes that have a penchant for sports. I don't know if she'll play football like he did, but hey, whatever floats her boat. After the NST yesterday I came home and went outside on the front porch in the rain to see why the mailman's truck was parked in my driveway (it was as if he was hanging out there or something). He was driving away down the street by the time I'd found myself having fallen down the full flight of wooden steps. I slipped up at the top and tumbled backwards and sideways the whole way down to the sidewalk (about 10 bumps and tumbles). Miraculously, I did not hit my belly. The rest of me was banged up a bit but I didn't break anything and am ok. But of course, it was BACK to labor & delivery to get another check up and another NST. Not more than 2 hours after my last one! I've now been in every labor& delivery room at the hospital and quite prefer room 2. Not that I'll get to pick, but I can hope! Little P. tested just fine and everything has been great. Such drama! I have to say it was terrifying to think Little P was in danger. One of the worst feelings in the world. I was hysterical at first, not because of the fall and my own pain, but because of the unknown. Because of the terror that I was unable to protect her. I'm just so relieved it all ended up just fine. I'd now like to strap myself to a bed and quarantine myself until she gets here. I can't take any more near misses like that. It's bad enough that when I drive I feel like every car around me is a potential missile coming after me. I find myself yelling "bitch" and "dirty bastard" at everyone in their cars who commit the tiniest infractions...all because it might endanger my unborn. I've gone off the deep end a bit, I will admit. But that's ok. I am allowed for now... so if you see a crazy-eyed woman in a white Honda Pilot, try to be understanding. She's a little worried, over-protective, and sleep-deprived...(much like most driving women today). Her belly happens to be crammed in front of the wheel, her pelvis feels like it has been smashed with a giant mallet as her crazed and plentiful hormones hold a frat party and that makes all the difference between them and her. Be gentle, you never know when you will encounter her or one just like her.
Save
You might also like:
38 Weeks
30 Weeks
34 Weeks
Linkwithin