Hi friends!
Little P. turned 3 weeks yesterday! Awww. :)
She celebrated by waking up Monday night at 1:30 am and didn't calm, settle, or go back to sleep that night. Nor did she nap all day yesterday. By the time my husband got home I mentioned that I was considering stabbing myself in the eye. Not really, but I said it. I'd tried everything to soothe her and she calmed, but just would NOT sleep and every time I put her down she would SCREAM herself to tears (she's now making tears and it's so sad...big fat ones...so that makes it even worse) and she could barely breathe. She's much too young to be allowed to "cry it out" so I'd pick her right back up and try something else. THANK SWEET BABY JESUS that my 2 Miracle Blankets arrived in the mail by the end of the day yesterday. I promptly washed them and last night, Chris swaddled her in one to get her ready for bed. He said she fussed for about 5 minutes and then zonked out. Well my friends, she slept from about 10:00 or so until 3:30 in the morning. Holy Crap! Since I'd gone to bed at 7:00 it meant a ton of sleep for me. HEAVEN!!! I got her up to eat and then she slept another 2 hours. She snoozed this morning, but it was fitful. After most of this morning, she was starting to get tired and fussy and she hadn't napped yet. So, I wrapped her up and she is out cold again! She's completely still and asleep as I write this. I hate to jinx it, but this blanket has been a miracle already! Let's hope the trend continues. I'd heard about it before, but didn't really think much of it until Paige got into her fussy fits. Then, I saw THIS POST on Lyndsay's blog and was immediately sold! I rushed to the Miracle Blanket website and read all the testimonials and doctors' comments and decided to buy 2 of them right then and there. After a few torturous days of waiting, those blankets were my savior yesterday! Oh Miracle Blanket, you gave me a night of rest. You gave me time to myself today during her nap. You have a special place in my heart now! I can't recommend it enough and suggest that every new mother have at least one ready to go for when her baby fusses . It's like magic! You can get one here.
This video shows the blanket in action but it's not my movie. Sorry for the "sales" post. I swear I'm not getting paid for it. I just had to sing its praises while I'm in the throes of blissful wakefulness. I'll be back soon with some photo cuteness!

Save
You might also like:
Miracle of Sleep
The first purchase
Activities
Linkwithin