Hi!
So, over the weekend Chris gave me some time, so I ran to get a manicure (get the old gel one removed and a regular one done instead) at a new place. The person doing my nails (once I sat down) said "So! When are you due?" *cue the Debbie Downer music*. The air fizzled right out of me. I didn't want her to feel bad, so I smiled and said "oh, no no no, I had the baby 2 months ago...I still have a belly that hasn't really gone down yet."
My belly was mostly gone by now with Paige, but this time around my stomach was bigger and I continue to look 4 or 5 months pregnant. I sometimes use a post-partum belly support and sometimes I use Spanx. That day I was brave to go without, or so I thought! LOL
Anyway, here are some questions you just don't ask:
1. When are you due? or Are you pregnant?
Just don't ask unless the other person has brought it up first. Or, if you are in the delivery room and the baby is flying out of her "deal" at that moment. Also, asking if someone is pregnant is asking them to deliver info they might not be ready to deliver yet OR they may not be pregnant and you make them feel bad about having a big lunch.
2. Soooo! When are you guys having kids? or Sooooo! YOU must be next to have a baby! (etc.)
This is personal. So many people are having issues with conceiving and it's a very difficult time. You never know who is having these troubles and that question can cause stress and tears. Take it from me. Just don't ask. And, some people don't WANT children and don't want to have to explain themselves. It's an invasive question that leads us to...
3. When are you two getting married?
Mind your own business! And don't make the happy couple feel all awkward and weird. He'll propose if he's darn well ready. Leave them alone already! And if they plan to break up, well, that's their business too.
4. When are you gonna have Baby Number Two?
Ugh. Some people only want one kid. Or, sometimes people have an impossible time conceiving a second child. Or, some are actively trying and don't want to share. Don't ask, unless you are a close friend and are already in the private loop.

What other questions do you find invasive?

And just because you visited today, here's a fun photo:
Save
You might also like:
Of Measure
Don't you just hate it when...
3 Months Old!
Linkwithin