My dear Little P,

I have no idea where to begin with this letter to you. I will say this: You are such a joy and treasure to us. Truly! I have been having so much fun taking care of you each day; I just LOVE it! I never knew just how much I would enjoy being a Mom, but you make it even greater than I'd ever imagined. Your personality is really starting to shine through. What a character you are! You love smiling and laughing (although you always get suspicious when the camera comes out) and shrieking with glee. You are ever-cheerful, thoughtful, and curious. You love to get full attention and be the star of the show. You play at being shy with strangers, but you always turn back with a bigger smile than the first after you coyly look away. Such the flirt!
Your favorite toy continues to be your Jumperoo. I think you'd jump to the moon if you could. You enjoy holding your smaller toys and pulling them toward you now for a closer look. You love to sit up on your hands while laying on your belly. You can really see the world around you this way, but you are most happy about seeing your toys within grasp! Your sweet baby kisses are my favorite new thing that you do. They are so sweet (and slimy!) and tender. You grab a hold of my face and plant your mouth right against my cheek full-force and hold it there until you can't breathe anymore and need to break away. I treasure those kisses and wish I could bottle them up and use them over and over.
You continue to grow like crazy and are now wearing lots of things for babies that are 12 months old. Such the tall one you are! You really do take after your Dad in many ways! You are starting to be able to sit up (with some help!) and enjoy playing at standing up while I hold your arms. You are starting to enjoy solid foods (so far you've tried Rice Cereal, Oatmeal, Peas, Sweet Peas, and Green Beans). You enjoy Green Beans best so far, but we're still just doing vegetables for now. Just wait until you try fruit!
I had no idea the time would go by quite THIS fast. Half a year old! You're doing great sweetie! It's been such an honor to watch you grow and thrive. I couldn't be any luckier.
I'll close this letter by telling you that my heart bursts with love for you. I have always heard the phrase "the heart aches with love." Or "I love you so much it hurts." I never knew just how much that phrase could ring true until now! My heart aches when you go to bed at night; I miss you so much when you are away from me. I stare at you sleeping and I am filled with so much emotion and pride. Just your smile is enough to bring me to a halt. I never thought I'd be so wussy and sentimental but I just can't help it. Please know that I love you more than the Earth, Moon, sun and stars...always...and no matter what.
Love you always,
Mama
Save