Dear Noah,

It is so hard to be the middle kid, isn't it?? As I write this, you are probably too little to notice or care much. But I want you to know that I love you so very very much. You are my bright sunshine and I feel bad that I've not given you as much starring attention here on our family journal!






 



This year, your third birthday fell just a few days after your brother was born back in January and we were in the hospital at that time. I thought of you that whole day and we celebrated your birthday with a little mini party when we got home a few days later. Of course, things got crazy and I never posted about your birthday here in this space! Grammie and Rico were here taking care of you while we were away having Liam. So, they were there for your little party. We had cake and you got to open your gifts from us, so you seemed pretty happy with the whole thing.
Grammie and Rico got you some cool little gifts you loved and your very own SLEEPING BAG with your NAME on it!!!! You LOVE that thing! It's got a big dog on it as the pillow for you to sleep on.
We gave you one of those Little Tikes Cozy Coupe truck things and a pretend gas pump that goes with it. You LOVE them and I'm so excited you were happy with your gifts. 

 





 







Wow, THREE!
What a special kid you are! You are one of the happiest kids I've ever seen. You are jolly most of the time and always try to make everyone around you feel happy too. You are a bit of an imp and you get into trouble like most three-year-old boys, but you always mean well. You are very clingy to Mom and Dad right now and love snuggling and having special attention. You are fun to be with; you like to laugh and say silly things. You love to dance, run, ride your scooter, ride your tricycle and play baseball. You are leftie, so Daddy wants to encourage your pitching arm!  You're already a great hitter! You enjoy tracing letters and doing puzzles. And you are working so hard on your potty training. We are letting you lead the way with that, and you've got it handled (for the most part!). We are proud of you and of how sweet you are. You are a good kind person and a loving one at that.
I love you so much Noah, and my life is so great because you are in it. I'm a lucky Mama.
Love you more,
Mama
Save