Dear Little P.,

Today you are 18 months old. A year and a half. It's hard to believe you were ever so small as you were when you were newly born. I saw glimmers, then, of the person you were and now that personality is starting to really shine.
You love laughing and rough-housing with your Daddy. I try to rough-house, but I'm just not as strong as he is. I can't really dangle you by your feet so easily. Besides, that stuff freaks me out so I'm happy for Daddy to do it. You love to start games like "chase Paige" where you touch my leg and run away for me to chase you. Or, we'll play "chase Mama" which makes you laugh so hard. You also love it when I give your Dolly a personality and she gives me kisses on the cheek...you're thrilled at the idea that other things can do what we do. You find it hysterical actually.
This past month we went pumpkin picking and you really seemed to love the loads and loads of pumpkins all over the field. So many in one place! We even went on a little hay ride you seemed to enjoy so much.










You drove with us up to Bar Harbor, Maine for a 4 night stay to celebrate our 5 year wedding anniversary. We got married in Bar Harbor and it was so special to bring you there for the first time. When it finally stopped raining, we did several different hikes in one day to show you all the different kinds of scenery in Acadia National Park. It was stunningly beautiful with all the fall foliage and you enjoyed riding in the hiking pack. You also loved running around collecting leaves everywhere we went. You figured, why walk when you can search for the perfect leaf instead? It was fun to watch you. In one day you saw a stream, lakes, little waterfalls, the ocean, and mountains. A good haul for one day! I will post pictures from that trip soon; they are still in the camera! Why?
Since we've been back, we've both been sick with colds and been miserable. It's been a challenging time. But I know we will both be better soon and I'll get to fully enjoy your energy! There are even glimmers of words starting to come out of your mouth here and there. Sometimes I think it's just my imagination; but I know I've heard them! Words like "outside" and "shoe" and "socks." And "Mama, Dada, and ha (hi)". Very important words indeed!








What an exciting time; watching you grow and flourish is so satisfying and such an honor! I never tire of watching you play and learn. I wish I could grab you, snuggle up, and stop time for just a little bit so that I could savor this all. To quote our new favorite picture book "All In A Day" by Cynthia Rylant..."The past is sailing off to sea, the future's fast asleep. A day is all you have to be, it's all you get to keep. Underneath that great big sky the earth is all a-spin. This day will soon be over and it won't come back again."



That makes me melancholy but it is so beautiful. It's an inspiring book we've been enjoying together that never fails to produce a tear on my cheek. (you can see the cut-paper illustrations and some of the text more closely at the artist's website here.) It just reminds me that I can't clutch time; it falls like sand through my fingers so I have to pay attention and enjoy while I can.
So here and now I want to tell you how much I love you, forever and always and no matter what.
Love,
Mama

Save