Dear Little N,
Yesterday you turned 6 months old!! I'm not thrilled about the whole "growing up too fast" thing. But I won't hold it against you. Yesterday was also my birthday and I turned 34. This is the first birthday I actually felt different; felt like I was getting old and feeling it. A birthday had never bothered me in that way before. Luckily it was fleeting and I got over it fast and had fun with you, your sister and your Daddy. We went to the beach (your first time!) and you seemed to love sitting in your little chair and then you took a little nap in your car seat. Party animal!
I kept looking over at you and marveling about how big you've gotten and how time is going so fast. I wish I could keep you my little huggy teddy bear for longer. I'm enjoying it while I can!
Let's see; what have you been up to this month?
You've started rolling all around the floor--finally figuring out the mystery of how to roll onto your back from your belly. And now you are in motion and we must baby proof the floors! You're pretty fast too. You've been enjoying eating your solids too. You're still sort of pushing the food back out of your mouth, but with a little coaxing we can get it all in there. :)
A couple of days ago you started babbling. "Ba Ba Ba La Laaaa Laaaa la laaaa muaaalalalaaaa" !
Or something like that. You use your loudest voice when you do it, so you definitely have things to share with us. It's sweet to hear you talking; and you certainly seem to enjoy it.
You spend your days in your Jumperoo and bouncy seat and then the rest of the time you're either rolling all around or napping. During all of this, you are constantly smiling or babbling or both. Such a little darling boy you are! Everywhere we go people stop to smile and chat with you and marvel about how cute you are. I tend to agree.
My favorite thing to do with you is hold you up and snuggle you and kiss you until you laugh. The best laugh the world has ever heard and it's imprinted on my heart and soul. I love you so much my little Boo-Bear and not a day goes by where I don't feel beyond blessed or lucky because I have you to smile and laugh with me. Thank you for being you.
Love you always and forever,
Mama

Save