Over the holiday, Chris' sisters handed over a few bags of clothes that their little ladies have outgrown. Needless to say, this is a huge help to us and it's so fun to see all the cute little things get worn again. As I was going through the bag the other day, I pulled out and unfolded this soft cozy little sweater and it brought back a rush of feelings. We bought this sweater for my sister in law's soon-to-be-born baby while we were on our trip to Florence, Italy in October 2007. We found it at a quaint baby clothing boutique in a tiny little village just outside Florence...after checking out some ancient amphitheater ruins and its grounds. We were excited to be on this trip; and it was a life-long dream of mine to see Florence and all its art. We were also excited because I had just begun my second pregnancy and my mind was filled with all the possibilities of the future. I was tempted to buy a little something for MY little baby, but decided against it. Superstitious, I suppose. We found the sweater, fell in love, and purchased it for our niece who was born just two short days later. The next morning I woke up to heavy cramps, bleeding, and my second miscarriage of what would be 4 before Little P came to us. It was the last day of our trip and half of it was spent racing around to different hospitals through Florence. The story of THAT is here. Anyway, the soft sweater was enjoyed and and carefully folded and stored. This sweater has seen a lot! It's funny how a piece of cloth can bring about so many memories and emotions. But, life is a collection of these...moments and the props that are part of them that stay in our minds to form such clear pictures. To thrust forth such clear feelings. It was such a sad time, but amongst the loss came the blessing of life in our new niece and I DID get to see all of the treasures of the Renaissance...and shared them with my second little babe and my loving husband. A dream come true! The sweater is now out to be enjoyed once again; it warms my heart that Paige is here with us to wear it and remind us of life's miracles.



Save