Hi friends! I'm so sorry it's been so long since my last update. The holidays had us buzzing all around, and then I developed a horrible cold the day I got home from our New Years weekend. I've been sick ever since...mostly trapped on the couch and unable to do much of anything. I'm finally on some pregnancy-safe antibiotics and hopefully that will help move things along! No belly photo update yet, I'm afraid. It's starting to really pop out now, so next week will provide a better view. Plus, I feel and look like crap. So there you go.
In other news, Chris has painted the nursery and we had pale oak hardwood floors installed there. Last weekend, he also put together the crib and the bookcase. It's really starting to look like a real baby's room now! There's still a lot left to do, but I'm thrilled with the progress and so grateful to my husband for all his hard work. Little P. is so lucky to have him for a Dad...he goes above and beyond for his little lady already! Here are some sneak-peek photos of the room...I'll be sure to take photos of the finished product when it's done (should be in mid February at the latest).
As for how little P is doing: she's great! As of Monday we were at 24 weeks pregnant. She's quite the mover and shaker lately! I've started recognizing her patterns of rest and movement. It's always a thrill to feel her jiggling around in there. She's most active at 7:30am and at about 6:00pm. She also likes to move around a lot when it's time for bed...I know that my change in position means she has to find a comfy new position as well.
My latest doctor's appointment went well. They are having me come back every two weeks for an ultrasound starting in February to check her growth progress due to the missing artery in her umbilical cord. And I will start going for non-stress tests at the hospital around week 28 that will continue on until the birth to make sure she is ok in there. I'm so grateful for the careful and deliberate care I'm receiving from my doctors. They are a cautious bunch who always would rather be safe than sorry. That makes me feel like I can rest easy knowing all is being done to make sure Little P. is safe.
Well, that's all for now. I've been pondering random observations about my pregnancy in general so I'll write a little more about that tomorrow. Be well everyone!

Save