Here is Paige playing pretend all by herself (a big deal for her!) She set up the figures in the chair all on her own and got out her little spoon and began "feeding" the figures from the picnic on the little table. I couldn't resist taking a photo of it. Up until now, I've had to assist, encourage, and facilitate this kind of playing.


I wanted to thank everyone for their kind comments of support on my last post; it felt good to feel the strength coming from you guys! I appreciate your kind words and advice; it is so heart-warming and uplifting. Thank you!!!
We are in a holding pattern on our end as we wait to hear from the place about giving Paige the hours of intervention she needs; I'm hoping to start as soon as possible so we don't keep losing time. There's a lot of hurry up and wait that goes on. It can get frustrating! In the meantime, we are enjoying the summer. We've been enjoying swimming the most I would say. Paige is going to be a little fish one day. I'm a horrible swimmer, so hopefully she got Chris' swimming genes.

I turned 33 the other day, and to celebrate we went and saw the new Harry Potter movie; which I loved. I liked all the books AND the movies. I sure did love that last movie though...very exciting! Don't you love a good movie? I want to go and see it in 3d now too. I guess that makes me a dork; so be it. At least I didn't dress up in costume for it. Although I don't blame those that do. To each their own!

Among my birthday gifts, Chris gave me a night at a fancy resort in Ogunquit, Maine (a Sunday to Monday) to go by myself and luxuriate at the spa, sleep when I want, eat when and where I want, and read. I plan to lay by the pool and read when I'm not sleeping or eating. LOL. He's such a good egg; he knew I needed a little space and time to myself and he delivered. What a nice surprise it was, and I can't wait to go! Now I just hope for good weather! Although, they have beautiful indoor spaces to enjoy if it's raining and it would be just as relaxing.
I can't stop daydreaming about it.
So, there's the update for now! I'll be back tomorrow to tell you about a recent experience I have dubbed "Poopaggedon." How's that for a cliff-hanger?
Save
You might also like:
Before and Now
Workin' for a livin'
4 Months!
Linkwithin