Dear Little P.,
A few days ago you turned 13 months old. Another month flown by. For stats...you're still really tall (about 33 inches tall) and getting heavier every day. My back can attest to it. You've moved into wearing a lot of size 2T stuff (depending on the maker) and that just blows my mind. It seems like I get you new clothes in 18-24 month sizes and all of a sudden you've outgrown most of them. I can't seem to keep up. And, being tall means that you can pretty much reach everything we don't want you to reach. So, you're quickly learning what not to touch thanks to my stern voice and annoying "eh! eh! eh!" noises along with "no touch!" You make the best face when I say that. You look at me all surprised and wide-eyed and then look at the item...then back at me and you back away from it. I'll enjoy it for now. I know soon you may not be as compliant! I try to praise you a lot when you listen; I figure it can't hurt! In the meantime we've baby-proofed what we can; that helps limit all the "no's". I'm down to saying it maybe once or twice per day at most.




So, you've been working hard on your walking skills as you cruise around the living room holding onto different things as you move. You typically don't like to walk while holding our hands. You seem to want to try it for yourself. You'll privately crawl to the other side of the room and stand up in the middle of the rug. Then, you'll try to take a little step and then land on your bum. It's like you want privacy and don't want prying eyes judging you or something. I can tell you, your Dad and I are so proud of you! We see you trying hard on your own...giving it your best in your own time. You're even starting to allow us to help you every once in a while which is fun. I love to see the proud look on your face when you've taken steps holding our hands. You can do anything you know.







You've been transitioning from 2 naps to 1 (a painful process for us all) and we've been working with you on a decent bedtime and naptime routine. We'll get it right soon; or fall asleep trying. I'll have to do a whole other post on this topic; but it's moving along in the right direction.
As far as food goes, we've still been introducing you to new and exciting things. You still prefer mushy pureed stuff, but you're slowly venturing out into new tastes. I figure, as long as you are eating some sort of thing we're winners. We've been working on weaning you from formula to milk and it's taking longer than I'd thought. You aren't the biggest fan yet. But, I've learned this stuff isn't really up to ME so I'm just riding it out.





So, that's what's been going on with you this past month! We've been slowing the pace around here; keeping things quiet and simple. I can see this works well for you and helps you focus much better than before. It's fascinating and rewarding to watch you learn and discover; so slowing down and simplifying has been good for both of us! I've really been enjoying being with you and I hope you enjoy being with me too. We have a lot ahead of us and I want you to know that you make me feel so delighted and so happy. You are incredibly precious to me and I'll never know of anything better than hanging with you!
I love you always and forever my little shining star,
Mama

P.S. There's nothing cuter than a baby in jammies. My heart melts every morning.

Save