Well I snuck onto Megan's computer while she's upstairs sleeping in preparation for whatever time Paige gets up for her night feeding and happily I was able to get into her blog. I just wanted to send her some birthday wishes and let you all know how proud I am of her. She's been doing such an amazing job since Paige arrived. She's always been a fan of sleeping and suffice it to say her ten hour sleep sessions haven't happened for some time. Although I try to give her some break by taking the first half of the night feedings she has so much love for our daughter she unfortunately spends the bulk of that time awake thinking of her. And when I make it into bed and her shift begins she wakes up and truly believes she's been holding her all night and freaks out wondering where she went. But out of everything, the sleep is the least that Megan has sacrificed for such a great daughter.

Megan's last birthday was a tough one as we were just informed that we were losing our fourth pregnancy. We took a trip out to Rockport, MA and the beautiful scenery could only do so much to keep us from our fear of what was to come and if we would ever get to meet Paige. Well, I took the day off of work and we're on our way back with our sweet girl to show Rockport what true beauty is.

Happy Birthday Meg! I love you SO much and am proud of all you've done for our family and can't wait to see how different our lives are once again on your next birthday!

P.S. to the blog readers: please feel free to send Megan your birthday wishes and let her know if she has helped you as she has intended with her blog. Her true reason for writing this blog has always been to let others who may be going through what we did on this road to parenthood that there is always hope. I can say that I pray daily for everyone who is having trouble achieving their dream of a child that it happens for them soon and I know Megan does too.

P.P.S while we're on the subject of birthdays and Megan's blog I have to tell you the story of when she first told me about her blog. It was my birthday and we were on our way out to dinner after I had just set up my new Wii and had a blast playing the first few games (FYI Megan's nail patella syndrome has her genetically engineered for Wii bowling). In the car ride she started off saying that she really wanted to start a new blog besides her craft blog and call it "Me and Wee." I looked at her and said, "Are you freaking serious? And you say I'm competitive! One beat down in Wii bowling and you need to start a whole flipping blog?" I was a bit embarassed when I realized it was the Wee one growing inside her that she was referring to.

P.P.P.S Since I got off track Happy Birthday again Meg!
Save
You might also like:
1 Year, Happy Birthday to P
Mother's Day and the Birth
Two!
Linkwithin