Photo shows Maren perched on a pillow RIGHT by the baby (she has to be right where the action is) as Paige has her "breakfast burrito."
Hi friends! Phew! It’s been BUSY here! And Oh, my aching tailbone. I feel like I have a softball jammed up my butt. Isn’t that a joyous thought? That’s why I started off with it. I knew that having a newborn would be hard work, but I hadn’t quite realized just how hard it was in terms of wearing you out and exhausting you. As I’d said, I KNEW it, but just didn’t GET it since it hadn’t happened to me yet. Now, I’m learning quickly that newborns have their own schedules and do not have any sort of consistency. The only thing I can count on is that she’ll eat every 3 to 3.5 (sometimes 4!) hours. She doesn’t necessarily sleep in between, which I’d always assumed happened. She hasn’t much slept during the day, so naps for myself have been out of the question. She’s so alert and curious about things but sheesh! I just let her lay quietly in the Pack ‘N Play or I let her hang out in the swing if the Pack ‘N Play doesn’t cut it for her. The rest of the time she likes to fuss and yell and therefore wants to be walked around, held, or rocked. In the evening, she likes to fuss a lot for no reason and it’s hard to get her to go down to sleep. But when she does, she gets a good stretch of about 4 hours before she wakes to feed and then another 3 or so (sometimes with 2 hours of fussing added in for fun). I’ll take what I can get and I am thrilled with it! What’s been helping a lot is that Chris takes her in the evenings and after dinner I run to bed (around 7) and he takes those feedings until midnight. Anything after that is mine. That way, I get 4 or so hours of sleep in a stretch and so does he. I’d do an extra feeding if I were able to nap during the day, but no dice! So, that answers any questions I’ve gotten in regards to how the baby is doing/what her habits are like so far. Typical newborn stuff! She already weighs 8 pounds and has grown another whole inch. I can’t believe how fast she’s growing! Her health is perfect and she’s a great eater, taking in 3.5 ounces to 4 ounces per feeding. So, that’s the nuts ‘n bolts and facts of how we’re doing. We’re hanging in there! The book that is comforting for me and very interesting and informative is “Healthy Sleep Habits, Happy Child” by Marc Weissbluth M.D. In layman’s terms it says that the first 6 weeks will suck really bad but then it starts to improve after that. And it goes into the whys, hows, and what-to-dos. It’s been a great comfort to know that all of this is very normal, typical, and natural. Her fussing is normal and when we can’t console her, it’s nice to at least know that it isn’t our or her fault. It’s just medically natural. We were fooled for the first week when Paige slept great all day and night. We learned from the book that this is called the "honeymoon" week. The fussing supposedly starts at 1 to 2 weeks and yes, that is what happened. It was a nice honeymoon though!! I just wanted to check in with this little update and say hello. I hope you are all well!! I hope to update soon with some fun photos and other thoughts.
Save
You might also like:
2 months
5 Months
3 Months!
Linkwithin