My dearest Paige, Hi my love! I cannot believe it, but you are 3 months old today! Time is certainly going by too fast!! And I always think that I can't possibly love you more, but then the next morning I see that gummy smile coming at me from your little bed and my heart melts and rebuilds itself with more love for you than before. It's magic! It's been such a joy watching you grow. In one week's time you started truly babbling and "talking" to me, started grabbing at objects instead of just flailing your arms, and you started sleeping through the night from around 7:30 to 5:00 or so (on averages). Sometimes you sleep until 4 am and other times you need to get fed in the middle of the night. But, more often than not, you are sleeping well. You also go right back to sleep after that morning feeding until 7 or 8. Thanks so much sweetie!!! You've started napping in your crib instead of your swing during the day and we've given up your swaddle blanket in exchange for your cozy sleep sacks. You're becoming a big girl! We are starting to see your little personality shine through and I must say you are a delight. I can tell already that you are very sweet and gentle. You have such a sweet way about you in the way you look at us and you are so generous with your smiles (when you are in a good mood!). Your whole face lights up when you smile and it just brings me to my knees. I feel so lucky when you smile at me...the ultimate gift that you can give...and it's just for me! Daddy loves it too, of course. You love to shriek and giggle at your toys as you independently play. You have such a lovely laugh and it never fails to make us laugh too. We can hear you giggling in your room in the middle of the night when you wake up; it's so joyous to hear! And finally, you have a little tooth coming in; your Godmommy noticed it at your 2 month vaccination appointment and it's still there but a little more noticeable. It's just the little tip of a tooth, and on the bottom left of your mouth. I think it's an "i" tooth...not the traditional center teeth...and it's so cute. All in all, you are a bundle of "cute-iful" as Daddy calls you. You went on a day trip with us to Gloucester on my birthday and you had a nice time strolling along the ocean line. We had lunch there too, but you were having a bit of a fuss at that time. I know you can't be in a good mood all the time! :) You also came with us on a 2-night stay at Grandma and Grandpa Carty's. Your first overnight trip was a success and you really enjoyed seeing them. More trips are in store, so I hope you are getting used to that car seat! I know you didn't like it at first, but it seems you are starting to tolerate it much better. I'm so excited to go on more adventures with you! Anyway, that's a basic summary of your 3rd month of life. And, as usual, I'm so excited about the future and am savoring each moment in the present. You are my precious little chubba-love and I love you to the moon and back a million times infinity. Love you always, Mama
Save