Hey friends!
I cannot believe it has been a week since Paige was born. Time has FLOWN by. I've spent most of my time recovering and doing baby-related things. I've had a lot of physical issues that have resulted from the labor, so I haven't been able to move around much. What else is new? I'll be able to expand on that when I write the birth story (a task I'll need more time to do!). First, though, I wanted to thank everyone for your wonderful and kind comments. We were so touched by everyone's words. I really appreciate how we have been in your thoughts and prayers...it has obviously been what has gotten us through to this point! We are so grateful for you all and for Paige's safe arrival. It is not lost on us that we are very lucky and need to honor every second with her. In my most tired or frustrated moments, I look at our Little P and I think of how special she is and how precious the miracle of her arrival was been. I've spent a lot of time crying (thanks a lot, hormones!) and feeling sentimental that a week has already gone by and she's already changing little by little. I can't bear to miss a moment! Anyway, I can't write for long so I will leave you with a TON of pictures to commemorate Paige's first week of life and all the first things she's done. She's been a busy lady, that is for sure. I hope you enjoy this picture-filled post! One more thing: Paige has a favorite song now. It's called "Colours" by Donovan. You can listen to it here. (I cry when I hear it now as I look at her pictures). You may have to hit the "play" button where the video is and you'll be able to hear the song. That video isn't mine though. Onto the pictures!!!

Meeting Nana for the first time


Meeting Nana and Grandpa was emotional and fun!


Chillin' with Grandpa


Getting ready for our first night's rest at the hospital


At Peace (and you can see the nasty spit-up on the blankie...ick)


The Going Home outfit in action


Waiting for the hospital to discharge us


Home!! Crossing the threshold to our new life


Maren meets Paige: and falls in love.


First night home in the crib! (she was a champ!)


Whoa! The first swing ride (she loved it, but only for 5 minutes or so for now)


Taking a nap on Mom is tough work


Peering around the pack n play is fun


A nice morning nap


Her first sponge bath at home went great! She loved the shampoo and hated the rest. Who wouldn't?


Uncle Jason did great feeding his first niece.


Godmommy Sue was so excited to meet Paige. She gave Paige lots of fun books to read.


Nana has been staying with us for this week to help us out with all the household and baby-care tasks. What a heavenly help!!!


Spending time looking cute is always on the agenda


It was great to meet Grandma Carty! (and Grandpa Carty)


Auntie Anne and her family came by to meet Paige too!


Phew! What a week! A family snuggle on the couch was in order.


Daddy Chris has done all the work for the baby all week! He's such a champ. His two girls in his arms agree. I am so thrilled to have chosen such a wonderful man to marry and have a family with. I feel so lucky whenever I look at him.
We are both even more thrilled that Paige chose us to be her parents. It's been a huge honor so far and my love swells more and more with each passing moment.

Save