I officially became a Catholic at Easter Vigil this year! What a special night in a zillion ways. My relationship with my Heavenly Father has deepened and I'm grateful for that. He has shown me the way to so much healing and I'm grateful for that too. Here are a select few photos of the ceremony.

Before the ceremony; that's the baptism font behind me there.


Going through the Mass but before baptism


Kneeling in the font (filled with Holy Water) and getting baptized. Wow!


I was glad the water was heated!


Here I'm going through my Confirmation and there's Holy Chrism (scented oil blessed by the Cardinal) being rubbed on my forehead (sealing me)


Father Peter giving me my First Communion


The whole experience is something I cannot describe...nothing is fitting. But I can say it was more amazing than I'd hoped.
I've been on my faith journey all my life and felt a major pull from God to rely on Him more. That all my answers to the struggles in my heart are with Him. I have found healing from past hurts. I've found more peace, too, knowing the losses from my 4 previous miscarriages before Paige came along are in heaven. They are enjoying peace, light, comfort and love. I have 4 other children I will meet one day and I often sit and think about them and wonder what they are like. The love for them exists here and in heaven. That is special.
Now that I belong to a faith community, I feel like I have a place to go where other people feel like I do. I have a place where I can use my gifts and talents God has given me. I can find ways to show love to others through ministry and self-donation. Wherever I go I like to look around to see if there's a way I can help someone...carry their bags, look for an item, help with their kids, etc. It feels nice even when I can do something little. And now, I can teach my love for God to my children so they can know that they are perfect and special and part of an amazing creation.
As I move forward in my life, I will include God in my plans, goals, thoughts and decisions. I know that He wants the best for me and I want that too!
I am a wife and mother first, I'm a friend, an artist and a helper. God has blessed me with these callings and I will do my best to carry them forth with a happy content heart!
Save