It's been a while since I've done one of these! Winter was blah and to be honest, I wore my pajamas almost every day. I just couldn't get out of my own way! Now that the better weather is here, I'm going to try and make a better effort again! Play along with us all here.
Here I am in my casual outfit for running around all day after a 16 month old toddler. Nothing earth shattering, but it's a new shirt from Anthropologie that I love...it's loose, comfy and hides my tummy pouch. Score! See how I'm casually holding a rusty watering can? I wanted to look rustic for you. (p.s. I don't garden...hence the rust on the aforementioned watering can).

And now that my latest Mom outfit has been displayed, I must tell you this: Waking up at 3:00 in the morning to see your little child standing silently and staring at you from 5 feet away is terrifying. I startled awake from a deep sleep and saw this figure in the curtain. It was a solid mass; and was just staring at me. "Paigie?" I whispered. No answer. "Paige!" I whispered more purposefully this time. Still no answer. Then I shut my eyes and thought to myself: "What if the ghost from that haunted restaurant we ate at earlier attached itself to me and followed me home??!!!!" Don't make fun of me; I was still foggy from sleep! I've seen a lot of Ghost Hunters and Haunted Collector episodes in my day. (perhaps not a good idea?)

Anyway, I ended up reaching out and Paige finally moved toward me and mumbled something about not being able to find one of her 10 billion lovies in her bed. Phew! Relieved it wasn't a ghost, I got out of bed and helped her locate the missing lovie (it was right next to her pillow all along, dammit!).
I've had friends tell me similar stories in the past and I always wondered why it would be so scary to have your child wake you up at night. Now I get it. I just need to remember that here, 3 am is not "dead time" but "missing lovie pain in the arse time."

And for no real reason, here is a quick sketch I did in my book the other day:
a little sloth!
Save