 Disclaimer: These posts are dedicated to following along with the book "Deliberate Motherhood: 12 Key Powers of Peace, Purpose, Order & Joy," a compilation of essays on motherhood written by authors who contribute to the Power of Moms website. Each month has a different "power" to focus on with the purpose of finding peace, purpose, order and joy in the role of motherhood. I will be writing various posts each month based on that theme. You don't have to have the book to follow along though! February's theme is "Love."

The second chapter/"power" of the book we're studying is about Love. Specifically, it discusses the power of love in everyday life with our family. I think a lot of us take love for granted. After all, if we have a spouse or children can't we assume there is love in the equation?

It is easy to forget that love has power. And it has the power to cure many an ailment. When the day is long, the kids are fussing and I start to yell I try to remember to:
1. Stop
2. Breathe
3. Remember my mother-love
4. Hug my kids and give them a kiss (even if they are in the middle of crying.)
5. Try and say something or do something funny

This elixer almost always solves any dispute. The tensions in the room disappear and smiles replace frowns and tears. Happiness is restored. Moods are changed.  Was it magic? Partly, since love has a magical quality about it. They say love conquers all and I believe it! It's a powerful potion and there in endless quantities free for the taking.

We can forget to use love as our balm can't we? We rush around ticking things off our endless to-do lists as we try to get as much done as we can before blessed bedtime. It's easy to forget the swirling love around us and within us. If you remember it and USE it in your tasks I think you'll find things go much more smoothly. Our children are more happy and cooperative, our partner more attentive and forgiving, or life more cheerful and full. Remembering the love we have to give can make all the difference in having a happy life.

We can also apply these principles to our neighbors at the grocery store, in the line at the shop, sitting around us in the waiting room. How can we use our love to help others? We can lend a helping hand, a smile, a word of advice, forgiveness...there are so many ways to change the day for someone else and, in turn, change the day for ourselves.

I've been working on this for the past 2 months... remembering to love in the thick of turmoil wasn't easy at first. (Especially when you want to just wring someone's neck!) But it's gotten so much easier as time has gone by (thankfully!)  Love is my friend and my champion. Without it I have nothing. So, remember that love isn't just an idea. It can be a real tool to help you in your daily life if you just use it.
Save