Dear Little P.,
You are 8 whole months today! You've spent much of the day so far crawling around and checking out your new toys you got for Christmas. I've been watching you move all around the house crawling on your belly here and there. I've also been watching as you pull down your basket of toys to choose one for yourself, as well as pulling over your bag of crinkly papers to choose something to play with. It's fun watching you be independent and I love seeing your proud face when you accomplish something for yourself. I'm proud of you too.
I will always be proud of you.

You've found your voice this past month. When we put up our Christmas Tree you were so thrilled! You started saying "OWWW--owowowowowowow!!!!" and then you added a "B" to it…Bow, Bow, Bow Bow Wow Wow Wooooow!! And then all of a sudden you said "Muuuummmmmmaa, Mum, Mummmmm, Mummmmm!!!" I know you don't know what that means, but it warmed my heart to 1. Hear your little sweet voice sounding things out, and 2. That it sounded like you were saying Mama. It was so wonderful and I babbled back to you as we had our own special conversation.
I will always listen to you.

This morning I gave you a piece of toast to chomp on…your first big hunk of solid food as usually you eat soft baby food. You had fun chewing and gumming on it; again looking so excited to eat your toast like Mama. Your eyes have never looked so bright or shiny! Your smile was big and wide. I'm so looking forward to seeing you learn more things for yourself.
I'm always here for you.

Last week I was putting you down for a nap and I wanted to snuggle a little. I lifted you up high and I put my head low so my ear was against your heart. I just kept you like that so I could hear the soft ga-thump, ga-thump, ga-thump of it. I could feel your warm soft breath in my hair and I thought about how special that little heart is. How it keeps you alive and keeps you warm. Such a miracle! I'm so lucky for it. You gave my hair lots of shall we say robust pulls right then and so I had to get up, but I hid my face and my happy tears away from you.
I'm so grateful for you.

Soon it will be a new year and so much is going to happen! You have a lot of exciting things in store and I can't wait to share them all with you. There's lots of learning and fun ahead. It won't always be easy and you won't always be happy, but I will do my very best to be patient, loving, fair, and kind. You will be great!

I will be there to hold your hand.

I will always love you.

Love Always and Forever,
Mama
Save