Dear Little N,

Hi Little Fella! Yesterday you turned 3 months old. What can I say? The time is flying by. (grumble). This past month you decided to start sleeping through the night more often. Thank you! It is so awesome, I cannot even describe it. You'll fall asleep, on average, by 8:00pm and wake up; on average, at 4:30 or 5am to eat. Then, you'll usually sleep until around 7 or 7:30. Sometimes you wake up earlier to eat, but as long as I'm getting decent sleep I'm happy! You know that about me. Your napping isn't regulated yet...you still are all over the place with it. But I read that it's normal for now and that pretty soon you'll start falling into a little routine.

In other news, you're growing so fast! You are already in your 6 month clothes and some of those are too short or snug. I have no idea how much you weigh, your next checkup is when you are 4 months old and I want the weight to be accurate so we'll just say you weigh a healthy amount for a baby!

You've started cooing at us and making fun little shrieks and squeals. Your smile is unequaled. You are quiet and serious a lot of the time, but if I catch you in the right mood you will smile on and on at me. It's like being in the glow of an angel, I promise you. It warms my heart when you look right into my eyes and grin or coo. I can already tell that you are sweet and gentle.

Hmmm. What other new things are you up to?

You have great neck control when we hold you up, but you have a bit of a struggle with tummy time. I blame your big head. :) I can pick on you because I have a big head too, see?
I notice you have started to find your hands and you attempt to suck on them and you make these loud smacking sound with your lips and tongue. If I put a toy in your hand for you, you'll hold it for a while. But you don't seem to notice or care much.

So that's your little update!
Having you in our lives has been such a joy, little Nut. You are such a pleasure to be with; we are all so lucky to know and love you. You're my snuggly little bear; my little sunshine. I love you for always and forever and being your Mama is a dream come true. With you close by, there's nothing I can't do.

I love you forever and always,
Mama

Hmm. That Mama is a crazy lady.
Save