Dear Little P.,
Yesterday you turned 10 months old. My beautiful girl! No more single digit months and you are leaving your infancy behind you. I'd be lying if I said I wasn't a little melancholy about it...I get scared about the time going by too fast. I wanted you for so long and then you came and now you're already 10 months old. I barely got a chance to really drink your infancy in. Luckily I paid close attention and gave you my all. I wouldn't trade a moment of the closeness we've shared for anything in the world. I'm so lucky to be sharing your life with you; I know that one day you won't want me quite so involved as your break out into your independence. So, for now I'm enjoying our snuggles and laughs. This past week you grew in 4 of your top teeth. Youch! You'd had one tooth up there, and then the other 3 came out to join the fun. You can sort of see them in one of the blurry pictures included in this post. You sure like to move a lot when you smile...it's hard to get a picture. It's a nice problem to have. You started pulling yourself up on the windows in the living room and on the ottoman. You look so tall when you stand! My little string bean. You should have seen yourself in your first Kindermusik class last week...I never knew you were such a social butterfly! You didn't want anything to do with me...you crawled right away to visit with all the other babies. You inspected their shoes, touched their faces, tried to poke their eyes (sheesh), smiled and shrieked at all of them...you really loved being there. Such a ham! You loved all the songs and laughed and screamed with glee during the little dances we had to do. You certainly weren't shy and you were very friendly. I can't explain it easily, but I felt so proud of you when we were on our way home from that class. I guess I finally saw a glimpse into the personality of my sweet little treasure. It is amazing to see you becoming the person you are meant to be. How lucky your Dad and I are to be able to witness it and guide you. There is a song, or lullaby rather, that I like with the words: "I will be your home, I will be your guide, I will be your friend, always on your side, sleep now in your room, quiet of the night, surrounded by the moon, 'till you see the light." (you can hear it here) Every time I hear this song I think of you and how I want to protect you and keep you safe...for now I can do that. We are your home and we will be your guide. We will love you for always and forever. But you knew that.
Love always and always more,
Mama


Save