Hi there!
I've been plugging away and continuing to work on my illustrations and preparations for the new things for my shop. I'm thinking I'll be ready to launch everything by early next week if not sooner. Yay! There's a lot of little details to work out...how to use a label printer, how to better keep track of accounting, which paper is best for printing, which labels work for what I want to do, how to paint the way I want in Photoshop...these are just a few of the issues I've been researching and tackling head-on.

Things are going well, though, and I'm so excited to share the first print with you.

Paige loves "blue birdies." So, I was inspired to create a little print involving them. I wanted to illustrate them with some sort of clothing on, and I just had this image in my mind of these animals as little "vintage" ladies having tea together. It was so fun to draw! They seemed to come to life instantly when I put my pencil to the paper. I wonder what they are chatting about.

Get it HERE.



 




The series of prints I've been working on personify animals...showing them in different scenarios that humans might find themselves in. I really enjoy drawing different critters; and I've been having such a great time thinking up different situations for them to be wrapped up in.
My process is simple. In the Teatime print, for example, I drew them first in my sketchbook. Once I was happy with the idea for the layout and how I wanted the birds to look, I used tracing paper to put them into a final drawing. I then brought that into Photoshop and carefully painted the color digitally. I made sure to make the vibrant colors a bit more muted with a white tint to give them a slight vintage quality. This softened them a bit; I'm happy with the effect. I am so thrilled each time a print comes off the printer and comes to life.
Their whimsical quality make them the perfect affordable artwork for a nursery or child's room. I even like them as artwork in my office space! My Mom mentioned she could envision this particular print hanging in the kitchen. I like to think they are great for the young and young-at-heart.
Hopefully you like them too! I'll continue to post about each print this week to show you them all. I'm so nervous and feel vulnerable, but here's to being brave!
As usual in the internet world, please no stealing these images to use as your own. Thanks!
Save