Keep knocking and the Joy inside will eventually open a window and look out to see who's there. " Rumi
I want to share my story in hopes to give others comfort. I have been in a dark terrifying place and looked for anything I could online to help me, along with professional help. I found it was comforting to me to hear other people's personal stories similar to what I was going through. Just knowing there was other people that had been in that dark terrifying hole and that I wasn't the only one made my suffering less.....
Here is my story...
My name is Michelle, my story with anxiety and depression starts back to when I was 13. I am now 36.  When I was 13 I remember feeling odd and had racing uncontrolled thoughts is how I can explain it. I was always a very inquisitive child always had to know how, why and what if.  I remember feeling anxious as a child and having an upset stomach allot.  When I would travel with my family I would get nervous, I wasn't sure why at that time. One night when I was suppose to be sleeping I was up as I normally was, it always took me awhile to fall asleep. Everyone else was sleeping and I remember lying there my mind racing with negative thoughts and began to start feeling this overwhelming fear overcome me. Panicking I got up and went into the kitchen and just stood there worried about what was happening to me I thought if I went down stairs to see my dog, that this terrifying panic would go away but it didn't. I then remember feeling like I was going to faint, I literally climbed back up stairs and called for my mom. I just remember telling her something is wrong but I didn't know what was wrong nor did my mom. My mom tried to comfort me and and lie with me that night as I could not sleep. I didn't sleep much for a few nights after that, as the continued fear was still present. I would try to sleep but the overwhelming fear would push me out of my sleep. My mom decided to take me to the doctor and nothing  was done for me at that time. I think 26 years ago depression and anxiety maybe was not considered possible in children or at least not as well known as now. I don't think health professionals were as knowledgeable as they are now with child anxiety and depression. I remember going to the doctors a few times that month due to my mental state. Nothing was done to offer me comfort or an explication to what was happening to me. At that young age of 13 I remember trying to find any information I could that would explain what was wrong with me as no one told me. What I know now that I didn't then was I was suffering from severe anxiety with depression.  I had a female cousin that had schizophrenia and at that time assumed maybe that is what is happening to me as I remember reading somewhere that that illness is link to being in families somehow.  I thought maybe I had some symptoms of schizophrenia and they seemed to be "maybe" what I was going through.  I remember reading somewhere that schizophrenics loose touch with reality. I did feel like I was loosing touch with reality but what I know now is what I was actually  having was derealization. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derealization. Being  young and not knowing how to ask or express what was happening to me nor ever remember anyone asking to explain how and what I was feeling, I just assumed my symptoms where of an onset of a severe mental illness. I was scared and obsessed with the thought of being schizophrenic. Along with feeling of being out of place with my peers and distant with life. It was a horrible time of my life still to this day when I hear spring birds chirping it somehow gives me flashbacks of that horrible experienced, as that is when this all happened at age 13 in the spring.
 Eventually the depression phased out as I preoccupied my teenage years with friends, boys and drinking. I was still a fairly quite person around people I didn't know. I think I always felt different since when that happened to me. I choose certain people to hang around and stayed with them. I didn't want to venture out and befriend to many people as I didn't have much self esteem to do so, quite insecure about everything. Since age 14 to 19 I had a few decent years I don't remember anxiety and depression being to present.  I was preoccupied being a teenager parting and drinking like most teens I suppose. When I hit 19 a year after high school the anxiety started to creep back up again.  I continued to have panic attacks from 19 to 20. Seeking help once again this time I was referred to a local psychiatrist but nothing ever came of it. I remember not offering much information to the psychiatrist as I didn't know how to explain what I was feeling and was frightened of what I might be diagnosed with. I still had this fear dormant inside that I could have  a severe mental illness and I was terrified.  I then moved to Vancouver BC when I was 20 and had my first baby when I was 21 to a guy that I am now married to. I never told my boyfriend/husband of my anxiety as I felt he wouldn't really understand what I was talking about. I choose to keep it a secret and tried my best to keep it under control. I didn't want anyone to think different of me I wanted to be strong and plow though life as much as I could without the anxiety holding me back. By doing that however I didn't have the best quailty of life I would lash out on my loved ones and was a very moody person to be around cause I simply hated why I was the way I was not "normal" it ate at me everyday. I remember the anxiety creeping again after my son was born and remember seeing a psychiatrist once again but I only went once I think I lost my trust and thought it would be the same outcome.  I think I then grew a strong tolerance to anxiety just tried to cope on my own till one day again...I will jump to my latest experience with anxiety depression and derealization. This time I couldn't go on, I needed to get help there was no plowing through anymore it was holding me back.
At age 36 and it all started again.... It hit me as fast as someone just flicked a switch and my life was changed, my life was different just like that.

I was getting ready to go on vacation with my family and I remember feeling something wasn't right for a few weeks I was feeling strange and I remember telling my husband a week before I think I might be getting depressed I just don't feel right. I was thinking maybe I shouldn't go on this trip something doesn't quite feel right but I couldn't possibly let my family down so I thought well I am 36 years old and I have overcome a lot of anxiety in my years and this can't be any different I will be strong and be able to stop  and cope. We arrived to the city where we were going and the day seemed fine I was preoccupied with shopping and helping my kids pick out back to school clothes etc.. I still had this feeling that something felt off but just ignored it until we got back to our hotel and I laid down on the hotel bed something hit me and it hit hard, my mind was racing It felt like something real bad was going to happen. I started having this overwhelming feeling of fear and panic and was trembling. I tried my best to hold it in I but I couldn't I told my husband something is wrong I have anxiety and I am scared. He just said it's fine just relax come down to the hot tub. I couldn't I could not leave that room. All I could think was this is the day I dreaded this is the day I have my first psychotic break. I believed it. I believed it so much that it caused so much fear in me and it didn't go away.

We came back home the next day and I broke down I couldn't eat ,I couldn't sleep and was loosing weight I couldn't stop shaking. All I could think was my family has lost me I am forever changed I will never get better. I had the worst derealization. I truly felt I was loosing touch with reality, I knew I was present and could see the mountains, the sky and people but I couldn't feel the experience and see the mountains and sky clearly, I felt like I was in a dream and was in this dark place. I also had time distortion. My days would go by so fast I didn't know if it was day or night. All this was terrifying to me this and derealization had me panicking more. I felt I was sinking. I went to the doctor and this time I explained what was wrong with me the best I could. My speech even was effected I felt I couldn't get the words out(slow speech) one of the symptoms of depression. I was confused but  I was older this time and was able to tell the doctor all that I was feeling that I remember at that moment. I was terrified my life was ending, I felt I lost who I was and everyone around me. I was shaking, crying and disconcert the doctor sat and listened to me and asked me questions and said Michelle you have anxiety with depression.  I looked at her and said are you sure? she said yes, you are going to need help. I then thought at that point I was needing to be admitted to a hospital. The anxiety was crippling. She asked me if I felt suicidal and I remember saying no but also remember saying that if I feel like this much longer I dont' know what I will do, it's unbearable. I said to her do you think I have schizophrenia cause I don't feel present like I am not in reality and she said it's the depression Michelle...and I said I feel like I am loosing touch with reality. The Doctor kept repeating it's depression and anxiety Michelle you need to believe me. The doctor looked right at me and said Michelle I don't say I am certain often but I am certain you do no have schizophrenia. 
The doctor provided temporary relief that day. I am not going crazy good to hear but the anxiety was still present so severe I would pace my house. I felt out of control I didn't know what to do I was so ill. My doctor prescribed me anti-depressants/anti-anxiety medication. It help take the edge of a bit it took a couple days to start to ease the anxiety but it was still present in me and the depression was horrible. That first three weeks I called help lines and local help lines constantly as I was scared with all the terrible thoughts that were running through my mind. I was scared I might harm myself. I remember and always will remember this one lady. I phoned our local mental health crises line and this lady came on the line named Jan she had a calming voice and I talked with her for an hour and she walked me through my panic and anxiety and told me I will be OK, everything I was feeling was to do with anxiety she had so much knowledge with everything I was feeling. She is where i first heard that one of the feelings I was having was called derealization and it was a normal symptom of severe anxiety and depression. I felt completely out of control until I talked to her she gave me confidence that I can manage and don't necessary need to be in the psychiatric hospital and it may not help me anymore than being at home, as much as I thought I couldn't handle it anymore and thought that I may need to be admitted, I somehow was able to cope at home. I was referred to a mental health worker at our local mental health office and he was great at listening and reassuring me that I am not going crazy. I still didn't believe although it always provided temporary relief when I was told I am not going crazy or schizophrenic. The fear of being schizophrenic always crept back up on me though. My belief was engraved in  my brain from when I was a child. I seen that one health worker a few times and thought I was getting better and tapered of my medication and it came back it hit hard I had to leave work my manger was very supportive and helped me get help that day.  I then requested to speak with Jan again at mental health on the phone when I called the crisis line again for help. I spoke with Jan and she once again provided a calming effect and reassurance. I talked with her for a while again and asked if I could meet with her instead of the guy I was seeing and she said that would be fine with her so I started seeing Jan. I also joined a group for anxiety at the mental health unit where I went. It was nice to be around others even though everyone has different degrees of anxiety it was just nice to meet people. The lady that taught the anxiety group was also Jan. She was amazing and taught us so much from meditation, breathing, exercises and worksheets and explaining the whole process of the brain and different degrees of anxiety, flight or flight response I learned so much.  Jan continued to counsel me one on one and taught me techniques to help the depression. She has so much knowledge and helped me in so many ways....It felt so nice to have someone be so sincere and have passion at what they do and want to  help others and she showed that. It has been five months now with medication and talk/cognitive therapy I am doing much better. The depression still is there some days but I have learned techniques from Jan on how to change your thought process. Exercise and eating right is very good for depression and anxiety. Thinking back its really is amazing how powerful our thoughts are on your brain. We can change our brain with our thoughts it just takes time and patience. I honestly never thought I would be better again I thought I was done. I can say almost 5 months later I am doing better and that should give anyone reading this hope. I have been there I know how you feel. I just finished my last meeting last week and it was left if I need anything  just to call and i was fine with that.



I hope my story will give you hope and comfort. Never give up it may feel like it isn't going to get better and that you are never going to get out of the dark hole, but you will. I didn't believe it at first but I listen to everyone and they said it will get better.....and it does you have to give it time, be patient, believe and fight. I know it seems like the anxiety and depression hits so fast and there's nothing more than wanting it reversed as fast as it came and to have everything back to how it was how you were, but that I can say from my own experience it didn't happen overnight but over time things started getting better. I feel I have changed but not for the worse, I just look at thinks allot differently....it's good. Stay strong and positive you can do it!
   