I was diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder after a psychotic episode last summer. I think I had a mixed episode with psychosis and anxiety. It was really frightening and I believed I was dying but no one would tell me. I did not sleep for over a week but I did not feel tired and would pace and walk around rather than sitting still! My mind was racing and my beliefs got more and more terrifying.

I was diagnosed with depression when I was 23 and I have had three severe episodes since then. Last summer was the first time I was psychotic and I would rather die and than go through that again. I thought I was dying and a part of me did.

I remember feeling very anxious since I was extremely young, I mean in kindergarten and infant school. I would not speak to the teachers, I was frightened and I was getting told off for being rude because I would not answer the teachers. I was always in trouble but I never said a word. I now believe I had selective mutism which is an anxiety disorder. I was just seen as rude and naughty.

At the moment I am well, I take 150mg Sertraline (also known as Lustral or Zoloft) for my anxiety and I take 200mg of Quetiapine as a mood stabiliser.

I have been stable for about 6 months now, I am back at work and doing well, I am going to the US next sunday for a week on business - I'm really enjoying work.

I don't ever remember being as content with myself as I am right now. I hoovered this morning purely because I did not like the bits on the floor, in the past I have hoovered regularly even obsessively as I would be worried that people thought I was dirty or did not look after myself. I'm cooking today and there is only me to eat it. I sat in the park on my own yesterday and did not feel like people were looking at me and watching me! Life is great right now.

I have started this blogg for a few reasons, firstly if one new person understands what it is like to be ill in the mind and understands a friend or family member I will be really happy, it will all be worth it!

Secondly while I was sick I felt no body understood, I still can't talk to my friends and family about my illness so I feel really isolated and alone. I'd love to hear about other people’s methods of coping.

Finally I really really enjoy the little things in life, a dandylion growing in the grass, the smell a frosty morning, a comfortable bed, a hot bath, someone saying thank you, the company of my nephew. I have always been too anxious or had my mind running too fast to notice these things before!

I first wanted to kill myself when I was about 12; to everyone else I was just a moody teenager who spent all my time in my room (nobody ever came to see what I was doing) nobody cared. I was an easy target for bullies and I would hang around with all the other kids who were bullied. Some of whom are still good friends. But I was not happy, I planned my suicide, I put the suicide note under my mattress and planned to take an overdose about a mile from my house down a farm track called green lane. I just never went through with it; I clinged to the hope that life would get better.

That’s enough for now, I want this blogg to be about the little things in life that I really appreciate as I have never really felt in control and enjoyed life so much!