2013 is drawing to a close.  I have 4 more working days this year and I'm exhausted. I am taking time off from Friday 20 December until 2 January. It will be a much needed break with plenty of rest and relaxation.

Apparently I'm moderately depressed at the moment, I'd call it exhausted and can't concentrate. However much I sleep I don't seem to feel any better at the moment. Everything is boring and I wish I could hibernate for Christmas.

My Hubby (Mr R) does not have any holiday left so I will be home alone for most of Christmas, however for the big day and boxing day we will be together.  We are eating out Christmas day, we are going to a local restaurant for Christmas dinner. Then boxing day we may go for a walk or something.

My new years resolutions for 2014 are the same as usual;
Eat less, follow a gluten free diet and cut out snacking and cakes.
Exercise more, walk to work from the park and ride when the UK weather permits.  Use Wii Fit.
Be happy.
Resolutions for 2010 were
1. to get up, get dressed and make the bed before switching on the computer or television.
I do this almost everyday these days.2. to post on my blog at least once a month.
Well I'm posting now.
3. loose weight.
I've gained even more.
4. keep a work life balance.
Doing well on this, just working 4 days a week and  not taking work home.  However I have taken a large pay cut to do this. 
RESOLUTIONS FOR 2008 WERE
1. Watch less television, listen to more music and be more active. I currently spend too many days in front of the televison.
Done
2. Have my own flat and be moved in by next Christmas!
Done but  sold it again to be in a larger home with my hubby.
3. Continue to try and expand my social life.
Done, I'm happy with my social life.
RESOLUTIONS FOR 2007 WERE
1. lots more friends, some friends I can ring and say, hey, do you want to go to the pub tonight!!
Done
2. loose weight, my medication made me put on a stone so I am going to have another attempt at shifting it!
Nope, still gaining weight.
3. be happier
Yes, much happier now I'm settled with Hubby.