If you told me that this time last year,  I was to undertake work experience for a couple of days, I would have been extremely resistant to the idea. I would have almost completely ruled the idea out. 

A year has passed since then, and I thought it was important for university that I get some sort of work experience. I emailed many law firms asking for work experience and fortunately one firm had the ability to take students on.

After a few emails, I had to have a phone interview. I was extremely anxious about the idea, as I still hadn't and still am struggling with talking on the phone. However, I did my research and prepared for the interview and it seemed to work as I got the placement. Us anxiety sufferers always have the "what if" inside of our heads and this is often why we say no to many opportunities. But, I just thought to myself I could die tomorrow, so now is the time. I always reminded myself that I don't have to go along with it too. The phone interview went well and I managed to answer the questions. It just reinforces the point that what you imagine will happen, often won't happen. You think it will be worse than it actually is; which is definitely how I felt in my case. Secondly, it seems we all really underestimate ourselves. We often see ourselves as worse off than we actually are. You will surprise yourself at what you and your mind are capable of.

I'm surprised at how quickly February has come around! I wasn't as anxious as I thought I would be. It's a lot different from school in terms of my anxiety; I wasn't as anxious, even though my anxiety did creep in a little bit throughout the day.  I used my breathing techniques a lot and reminded myself that I could leave if I needed to. I also used a lot of logical thinking to understand why I was feeling sick etc. 

The two days were really useful and provided me with a lot of information to further a possible future career. The other students were all lovely and it was nice to meet people interested in the same subject area. I have to say, it was really beneficial and I really enjoyed it. It was something completely out of my comfort zone and it has lifted my mood. Knowing I have achieved something and doing something I never would dream of doing, is a great sense of accomplishment. 

For a while, I just had to throw caution to the wind and take the last opportunity. There was a lot of doubt in my mind, but I just had to go for it. I know some of you may be reading this and thinking there is no way I would ever do that. Don't worry, your time will come around. I was like that once, and I do still have my hesitations. You will get there and achieve what you want to do. Just keep going, because it's astonishing how life can turn things upside down and change things from the worse to the better in a matter of days.

If there's anything to learn from this, it's to grab the opportunity. I know that to this day, I won't partake in every opportunity as my anxiety can be overwhelming. I also know that many of you may not feel ready to undertake any extra opportunities. But if there's even a slight possibility that you want to give it a go, do so. It won't be half as bad as you think and it will be great exposure to hopefully learn from and overcome your anxiety. Secondly, I think in today's society we talk ourselves down, saying we're not as good and often perceive ourselves so, which is rarely the case. All of the times you've gotten through something you thought you never would and have done better than you've thought, all show you are better than you perceive. Again remember "you have the same rights as anyone else to be on this planet".

I hope you've enjoyed reading.
Best wishes!
Amy xx