A letter to you, if you are struggling. It may be triggering, so please don't read if you think it may be.

Dear You,

I am writing this to you because I know you are severely struggling with your mental health and you just can't seem to find the effort to get better. All I want to do is put my arms around you and tell you everything will be okay because I was once in the same place. I had nothing in my life that I wanted to live for and I had no energy to spend on what might be or what could be, but on simply the inhale and exhale of my breath.

I am writing this to you because I too have wanted to die. I too have harmed myself, I too didn't want to let people down anymore and I too didn't see the point in living. But I also am here writing this for a more important reason than to just to relate our pasts together, but to explain to you a future because not every illness of the mind is the same, but the outcome can always be changed in some way and somehow.

I am writing this to you because I know that you also can make it to a better place, to a better life and time where the sun shines brightly through your window and the breeze flows through your hair when breathing is second nature. I once felt that when reading something like this, it didn't always change my outlook because my lack of hope at a tomorrow was not something that could be changed through reading words on a page. But, this is why I want these words to stand out like a sunflower amongst roses, like capital letters on a screen, and like blood, sweat and tears on a table. Because I know that this is what it takes to live with these conditons. I know it takes every inch of you and your body to keep going when there is just nothing left to give. But the body is not made to let go easily, it is made to survive. When we get cut, we heal over and when our mind is unbalanced, our body will fight to understand the truth. These words might just be another empty page to you, but I hope you will take every letter and hold onto them like your heart tries to keep beating because if I could be there in person to tell you that you do have the strength and capability to have a life worth living, and be by your side, I would.

For now I just pray that the words resinate. I hope you feel the truth that I speak of and the stories I tell, and that you too can come from a place of pain, to a place of happiness. It's not going to be easy. It is going to take a lot of willpower, which I understand you feel you may not have. But, deep down, we all do. I know that I surprised myself that I am still here in flesh and blood, today. It's going to take time to find the right person to listen to you, but don't give up because you'll find the fitting piece and jigsaw will become whole. 

I am writing this to you because I know how important life is, and how important you are to life. I am writing this to you because I know you can get better. I am writing this to you because I know you have the strength to fight and that is why I took the time to write, because life has better days which may just be around the corner.

Amy Xx 