The first year of university is already over and I can't believe it! It only seems like yesterday that I was packing my bags for university and yet I am now packing everything to go back to my hometown for three months. I have to say that university was the best choice I have made and I have had the time of my life. I've met some incredible people and made friends for life, had so many opportunities, so many laughs, funny experiences, memorable nights out, memorable days, learnt how to live independently and studied something I absolutely love. It definitely is an experience unlike any other.

I feel so blessed to be where I am right now considering I didn't even think going to University was possible only a few months before finishing my A-levels, but I continued to battle my mental health issues and achieve my goal. It definitely wasn't easy to get into university; far from it. But the experiences of mental illness has made this experience just that bit more special. It has made me step outside of my comfort zone further than ever before, leaving only a few things to accomplish on my anxiety hierarchy; a job and driving, both which I have already have plans to accomplish this Summer. There isn't really too much of a hiding place at university either; you have to get taxi's, buses, ask for things, make complaints, pay bills and so forth. I'm not saying that it is easy because it's not, as anxiety and depression have still been part of my life at university and I'd be lying if I said at some points I haven't struggled, but it's much less than ever before and luckily through some strange twist of fate, I found someone whom I am very close to, that has experienced similar and we have both helped each other through this first year. The majority of people I have met have also been very supportive. Nevertheless, I am proud of how far I have come and I am hoping to continue into my second year.


It's sad to say goodbye to my first year, but it has been the best year of my life and I am so grateful. I never thought I would see the day and it's hard to comprehend, when you're used to living in a place of darkness and are now experiencing quite the contrast. Roll on year two - I'll leave you with some anonymous pictures! 

I begin my Germany cycle for Mind charity next week and you can still sponsor me, here or text RFAB60 £5 to 70070. Any amount is greatly appreciated.

Amy Xx