Now and then I have the occasional guest post here on my blog, and today's post is from Khiron house. I hope reading both this blog post and mine on tips to help with anxiety, will help with your recovery.

9 steps to deal with anxiety

Dealing with anxiety every day can feel like a losing battle, especially when you feel like you’re the only person dealing with it. In the UK it has been estimated one in six people will suffer anxiety or depression every year. It’s important to know that you’re not alone and there are many ways to help you deal with anxiety.

Here are nine steps you can introduce into your daily life to help reduce anxiety and chances of having a panic attack.

1) Be early

At any event, make an effort to get there early so you’re not rushing. Being afraid or nervous about being late to an appointment can make you feel really stressed. You can avoid this by making sure you set off early so you can erase any possibility of being late.

2) Follow a routine

You can sometimes feel stressed if your plans get thrown off course, whilst you can’t always control your daily schedule, you can try to follow a routine that can minimise any stressful situations from rising up. 

3) Start the day positive

I understand this one is not always easy. But, if you can start the day on a positive note, it can help pave the rest of your day. Before you even get out of bed, think about three positive things: these can be three things you’re thankful for or three things that make you smile (like that cute puppy video you watched the other day). This simple daily routine can relieve stress and naturally make you feel happy.

4) Get plenty of sleep

Getting enough sleep is important for many reasons. Along with benefiting your health, sleep can also benefit your attitude and dispel any negative feelings. When you’ve had a bad night’s sleep you can sometimes feel sensitive and easily stressed, but getting enough sleep can contribute toward having a positive outlook.

5) Exercise

Doing daily exercise has been proven to help with anxiety. Yoga is regularly recommended because it’s a soft and relaxing exercise. Yoga helps stretch your muscles, relieve stress and the controlled breathing summons a wonderful feeling of calmness and serenity.

6) Avoid caffeine

I understand you might enjoy your cup of coffee in the morning but caffeine can make you feel even more stressed. Studies have shown that caffeine can inhibit the way you cope with anxiety and can provoke panic attacks. Instead of caffeine, get plenty of sleep or try exercise as that helps reduce stress and releases endorphins.

7) Write it down

Get in a habit of writing your thoughts and feelings down. Writing is a recommended therapy when dealing with anxiety because you can write down your worries and it helps you process those moments. Keep a journal with you or wait until you get home in the evening to write down what you did that day.

8) Controlled breathing

Often you can calm your nerves with a simple breathing technique. Take a smooth, deep breath through your nose, feel your diaphragm stretch. Hold it for a moment. Then slowly release the air through your mouth. Repeat the technique. Focus on your breathing. Controlled breathing exercises relieves stress and helps calm anxiety. You can do the breathing technique standing or sitting, but personally I find it easier to stand.

9) Speak to a therapist

The process of talking to someone can be very beneficial when you’re dealing with anxiety. Speaking to friends and family is always recommended but if you find it hard to talk to them, try speaking to a therapist. Seeing a trained therapist on a regular occasion can be therapeutic and they can offer advice on how to treat your anxiety.


There are many ways to deal with anxiety, don’t let it take over your life.

If you would like me to write a guest post for your magazine/website etc, then please get in touch. Similarly, if you would like to write a blog post for my blog, do get in touch! You're welcome to email me.