It's been a long time since I've reflected and had a proper catch up with you all, so I thought I'd include you all in this roller coaster of a few months.


I passed my theory test and only have a week to go until my practical driving test (I'll let you know how it goes!) I had to retake my theory because it ran out after two years. Fortunately with enough preparation, I passed it first time again. I feel I have gotten to the stage with my anxiety where I can tackle my driving. This is something which would have given me major panic attacks before, but this is no longer the case. Hallelujah! 
I passed the first year of my Law degree with a 2:1 across all of my modules. I am about to embark into my second year in a new house and living with some amazing people I met during my freshers. Here's hoping I can keep my grades up! This year I chose my optional modules to be medical and family law. 
I currently work in my local charity shop whilst I am home from university as a volunteer. This was a big step for me to take as having a job is at the top of my anxiety hierarchy as the thing that triggers my anxiety the most. However, on the first day of the job I had next to no anxiety. My step for next Summer is to get a paid job!
I did a week's work experience in a Law firm called Bond Dickinson, which proved to be very beneficial and took me out of my comfort zone even further.
For those of you who followed my sponsored cycle to Germany, know that I had to undertake one of the biggest challenges of my anxiety journey which was to find myself across Germany and get on a plane back to England, completely alone. I have no idea how I managed it, but I did. Very proud!
I am coming up to a one year anniversary, which again is something I'd never think would be possible with all of my anxiety issues, but yet here I am! I have been very lucky to meet a person who has helped me through every step of my recovery and has been understanding and caring too. (And Mum, I haven't forgotten about you either of course!)

Apart from my depression being an issue for the first month of the holidays, I am slowly getting back on track and tackling my anxiety as each day goes by. I have still had days where I have been very anxious and days when depression has been a cloud over my head, but I am getting there. It's hard to think that I was once a girl, aged seventeen who couldn't leave her house and walk to the shops. Now, I am a girl at age nineteen who is living alone, travelling alone, learning to drive and working. I never thought I'd see the day and I am extremely proud. I have come to far and I never thought it would be possible, so thank you to everyone who has helped me along the way - you will never be forgotten and your help and support has been the best gift I could ever asked for. If anything can give you hope, it's your strength from within and the knowledge that others have made it through. I hope I get there soon enough!

You can do it. I have no doubt,
Amy Xx