Recovery: 'return to normal state: the return of something to a normal or improved state after a setback or loss.'

Recovery begins from the day you feel you are suffering. The day you take action and control of your situation is the day you go on the road to recovery.

A first thing to note about recovery is that it takes time. Recovery can take weeks, months or even years. For me, it's taken over a year so far and I'm still going strong! Don't rush your recovery as your body knows what's right for you.
One day you may wake up and feel like you have the ability to tackle the thing you've always been scared of. It will happen. Other tasks may take a while to accomplish. Secondly, anxiety is based upon repetition. With anxiety, your body feels there is a danger whenever you try certain tasks such as going to school, catching a bus etc. Tackling the thing you fear, can take a while, but don't fret as It does get better -  just think of my recovery process! At first I couldn't leave the house and now I am slowly getting back into school - which is my biggest anxiety trigger. I've got a while to go yet, but you must take it slowly.

I wish I could tell you recovery is easy, but there will be bumps in the road. I wish the same as you, that I could do what I wanted when I wanted. However my anxiety tends to get in the way.
Recovery wont always be smooth. Many people use the term good days and bad days. One day you'll be able to tackle many things, such as catching a bus and you may be able to sustain these days for a while. However, the next day you may suddenly feel you can't tackle the task you were able to yesterday. This is completely normal. For me, today is a bad day. But, I am not deterred. I know that not everyday will be good, but you must think of everything you have achieved so far.

A positive thing about recovery, is knowing that you're becoming a stronger and better person. The things you tackle which seem big to you, such as catching a bus make you feel amazing after you've accomplished them. You get such a buzz from doing something you fear.

Just remember, recovery takes time and is different for everyone. Don't rush recovery and be proud of the things you accomplish day by day. I can't promise you that it will be easy; there will be great days and then some setbacks. But you must keep going and do not give up. You will get there eventually. Remember, I'm going through recovery too!



I wish you all the best and remember you've got this. People have been through this before and managed to get back to full health. You're not alone.


Amy xx