Since I've been preparing for my exams, I've put together some top revision tips:

1. Vocabulary - the best way to learn vocabulary for me, is through seeing something repeatedly. So, put the words or definitions where you are going to see them a lot. I.e. the bathroom, bedroom and so on. You'll be learning vocabulary in no time and without even trying. On the other hand, learning vocabulary can be effective if you learn so many words each day. For example, I try to learn 10 German words a day.

2. Mind maps - mind maps are my saviours. I created a mind map for each topic and used information from class notes and books. I condensed the information down and used a range colours and shapes. It's proven that your brain remembers information if it's connected with a shape. 

3. Classical music - I'm not a fan of classical music, however there have been studies to suggest that it improves your brain power! I've found that it keeps me concentrated as it's a stimulant. Before, I used to get distracted singing along to lyrics.

4. Make sure you have a plan - it's really important to have a plan of when, where and how much revision you are going to do. It's suggested to do an hour per subject per day. This plan will keep you on track.

5. Learn to have a break - if my anxiety has taught me anything, it's to have a break. Forever, my teachers had been worried that I would 'burn out.' Taking a day off now and then is fine, even if it's a couple of days. It's needed to refresh your brain. When it comes to revising, I tend to revise in a half hour to hourly block, then take ten or so minutes off before the next subject.

6. Past papers are the secret - you have revised everything, but you have never seen a past paper? Past papers are good for your timing, knowing what has come up in the past and practice for what the examiners are looking for.

7. When should I revise? - you need to revise when you are the most efficient. For me that's early in the morning or at night. There is a quiz that can be taken to see when you revise best. On the other hand, if you revise before you go to bed, your brain will be absorbing the information whilst you sleep.

8. No pain no gain - you have to set rewards. Revision can be a drag, so every time you finish a module, give yourself a reward. This can be a piece of chocolate, listening to your favorite song and so on. Your brain will soon get used to revision. The brain wants to do things that are rewarding. 

9. The future - I know that when you're four months before the exam, you don't see the point in revising. Imagine the day you open those results and get those A's and B's because of the hard work; it will keep you motivated.

10. Time - it's important to start revising early. It's best to have time to keep repeating and learning. Many teachers argue that this is the most important thing. It's suggested to do an hour per subject per night from the beginning of the course. In this time you can be creating mind maps and so on, therefore when it comes to revision, you're ready.

11. Examiner reports - these are amazing. The examiners are basically telling you what to do and what not to do in the exam.

Remember that hard work will pay off, but also remember that exams aren't everything. It's really hard for me to realise that. I want to get really good exam results to prove that this condition hasn't defeated me. As one of my teachers said before an exam once 'You could be dying right now, it's only an exam.' 

Just try your best. I wish you good luck!

Amy xx 