I got nominated again for the Liebster award!

1. What is your favourite thing about blogging?
I think it's a great form of expression, which otherwise you freely wouldn't be able to do. I have also met so many people who have been through or who are going through similar situations to me, which hasn't only helped me, but those around me.
2. What is your must have beauty product?
I'm not a massive fan of beauty products, but I suppose it would have to be my Nivea primer. It works super well and you've got to have a solid base to build upon, right?!
3. What is the most worn item in your wardrobe?
Just recently, I've thrown away quite a few of my old tops because of the move to university and the memories that they hold. But, I reckon it must be my red tartan winter jacket. It must be at least five years old. The pockets have holes in, but I just love it too much to ever get rid of it!
4. Favourite movie?
It has to be Bend it like Beckham. It reminds me of my childhood and it's definitely a happy go lucky film. I could watch it forever. I wish they made a second one, or at least one with the same cast.
5. Would you start a YouTube channel?
I would like to, but I'm not sure I have the confidence. I write this blog anonymously, but I'd like my YouTube channel to be related to my blog somehow. It would requite me being in the video. Perhaps when I finally feel comfortable showing myself, then I will think about setting up a YouTube channel as it seems an opportunity full of experiences. 
6. Your favourite restaurant / place to eat out?
This is difficult. I'm not sure whether it's a chain restaurant, but it's called Pierre's. It's a french restaurant which does the most amazing food.
7. What is your favourite place/country that you have traveled to?
I would like to say that I remember America quite well, but unfortunately I don't. My favourite place other than that is probably London or in terms of a country, Italy.
8. Your favourite quote?
There's way too many that I like!
9. What would you like to be doing in 5 years time?
Finish my training as a lawyer or be in the police force. I think It's more towards the police force than anything else, which is something I've wanted to do since I was seven years old. But above all, happy I suppose.
10. Your favourite book?
The Noughts and Crosses series. The first book in the series is the only one that has ever made me cry. 
11. Do you have any pets?
No. But I would love to.

Amy Xx