This is a topic that some may regard as sensitive or even private, but I feel that it's extremely important to talk about. 

If you're a woman, it's more than likely that you've dealt with contraceptives in one way or another. By that, I mean hormonal contraceptives such as the pill, coil, patch, implant...the list could go on. Not every woman on the planet will have experienced these first hand as you may not have needed to, or wanted to, but I'm pretty sure that you've at least heard of it. Over the last year it has come to the forefront that there may be a connection between hormonal contraceptives and mental health and I am inclined to agree. People may use contraceptives for a range of different reasons, whether that be to lessen the symptoms of menstruation, to trying to reduce acne and preventing pregnancy. But, whatever the reason there may always be side effects as a result. 

I've spoken to many of my friends about these hormonal contraceptives and there have been mixed reactions. The problem is, is that every single person will have different or even no side effects to these contraceptives and so no one story is the same. The contraceptive which might work for one person, may not work for another. But, I still feel that there appears to be a correlation between at least mood and the contraceptives. 

From my personal experience, I started on one contraceptive pill which I had to take every day. It seemed to serve me well, as I had little to no side effects, apart from weight gain. Speaking to my other friends, they had also been on similar and it was also okay for them. However, I did notice a change in my mood. Having underlying depression and then having what I felt were many mood changes, made it difficult to tell whether it was my depression or whether it was the pill. Ultimately, I changed to another pill and it was much worse, especially with physical side effects as well as mental. It eventually got the point where after a few years, I decided to come of the hormonal pills altogether. For me, I couldn't handle the changes in mood, eating habits, weight gain, body temperature changes, acne...the list could go on. Although these side effects were small in my eyes, the mental element was really the one that concluded the decision for me, alongside the eating habits and weight issues. A year after coming off the pill, I finally had regained regular periods. Most importantly, my mood changed. I no longer felt as groggy, as down and emotional. I felt that a weight had been lifted and I felt so much better in my body. I feel that it did have a huge affect on my mental health, in negative terms and I'm wondering how many other people have noticed changes in their mood too. I just felt like there was almost a fog that I was experiencing in my brain and I was certainly more emotional and this changed when I no longer took the pill. This is only my experience, and it may be suitable for other people, but as far as I am concerned I never want to use a hormonal contraceptive again for those reasons, as long as I can help it.

I'd really like to hear you experiences. Feel free to comment below.

Amy Xx