This post may be triggering. Please do not continue reading if you feel it may be. 

According to selfharm.co.uk The phrase ‘self-harm’ is used to describe a wide range of behaviours. Self-harm is often understood to be a physical response to an emotional pain of some kind.' 

Self harm can often come in conjunction with a range mental illnesses, including depression. From a personal perspective it is something that reduces the pain and struggle that I am feeling. Although I don't self harm regularly, I have done so and in a few different ways, which I wont list here for trigger reasons. When it all becomes too much and I cannot see a way out, I see it as the lesser of the two evils at the time. And although it may provide temporary relief, I try to avoid it if possible because of the way I feel afterwards - which is often worse. 

Self harming can come in a range of different ways and can be under the umbrella of self harm if it is done purposely. It is also possible for it to become addictive. 

I want you to know that it's nothing to be ashamed of. I know in public, it's something that many people hide by covering up their wrists and body or by staying inside. It's something people would never know about unless you saw it. But, never feel ashamed. You're not weak for self-harming because you are fighting through something so massive that you cannot hold onto the pain.

For some, there is a misunderstanding that it is about attention, and although this may be a very negligible amount, it seems almost incomprehensible that someone would want to harm themselves to such a painful and horrific extent, that it was just for attention. It's well known that it can be a symptom of a range of mental illnesses. 

You and I both know that it's a difficult issue to talk about, because I myself find it difficult to tell people when I have self-harmed. But, it is so important to talk to someone because there is usually a route cause of the problem. It's easier said than done, but getting help is so important. I have done it, and I know you have the strength to do it too.

I will write another post about some help and tips for overcoming self-harm soon.

Stay strong. I know it's hard, but you can bounce back. 

Amy Xx