A few weeks ago, I was having a pretty rubbish week in terms of my anxiety. I was once again in the situation of thinking "what can I do help my state of mind?" Quotes have always been a massive favourite of mine. They give insight, help and ultimately I can relate to others. I was feeling quite down on myself and I'd had enough.  I looked  up some quotes to do with fear, anxiety and my fear of failure in the hope that my mindset would improve. I think it would be a good idea to share the best ones that I found with you, in the hope it will help you too: 
 "Remembering that i'll be dead soon is the most important tool i've encountered to help me make the big choices in life. Because almost everything - all external expectations, all pride, all fear of embarrassment or failure - these things just fall away in the face of death, leaving only what is truly important." Steve Jobs
"It is impossible to live without failing at something, unless you live so cautiously that you might as well not have lived at all, in which case you have failed by default." J.K Rowling
"This is all you have. This is not a dry run. This is your life. If you want to fritter it away with your fears, then you will fritter it away, but you won't get it back later." Laura Schlessinger
"Never be bullied into silence. Never allow yourself to be made a victim. Accept no one's definition of your life; define yourself" Harvey Fierstein
"Life is a series of natural and spontaneous changes. Don't resist them - that only creates sorrow. Let reality be reality. Let things flow naturally forward in whatever way they like" Lao Tzu 
"Expect problems and eat them for breakfast" Alfred A. Montapert
 "Either you run the day or the day runs you" Jim Rohn
I know some of these quotes may come across as quite morbid and harsh, but to me they were the most useful when looking up about anxiety and my fear of failure. I also understand by reading a few quotes, your life won't suddenly be turned upside down. This is only to help you on your way. Perhaps one day I will write about my favourite quotes of all time...

Best Wishes!
Amy xx  