Every day I slowly develop my mindset and understand the philosophy of the world just that little bit more. It makes me review the world around me, life, the universe, how I can improve my life and what it's all about. Recently, I've begun to include a new philosophy that's been around for hundreds of years.

Anxiety can be so crippling and in reaction to the simplest of things. I'm not saying that this new philosophy can change your anxiety forever, but it may help you to go outside of your comfort zone. After all, exposure has been proven to work.

You must have heard people say at least once in your lifetime: 'at least you're not dying', 'YOLO', 'life's short' and so on. This philosophy I have heard all of my life, but have never had the confidence to put it into practice. But as each new day arrives, another door opens in my mind and it just so happened to click this time. For example, I have applied for Law work experience, where I will have to undertake a phone interview. I'm not going to lie, I'm scared! Especially because talking on the phone is something I'm yet to tackle. However, with this way of thinking, I know that it's not the be all end all. I know that life's short and I should just give it a go. If I mess up, then at least I've given it a try. Firstly, I'm only human and the person interviewing me will have highly likely messed up before and secondly, what's the worst that can happen? Unfortunately, I cannot apply this philosophy to all areas of my anxiety, such as school, although the application in theory does make it easier. As time goes by, the more I feel it would work. For example, I plan to get my ear pierced. Easy for some, but not for others! It's the little things.

As much as I wish I could get on stage, drive and have a job all in a breeze, it is something I must tackle. There will still be things that I will find incredibly hard, even with this philosophy in mind. However, I think it's going to help. A new year is upon us and it's time for a fresh start (although any new way of life can begin at any day) Perhaps we should all strive to do something out of our comfort zone, because that's usually where the fun is! Anxiety will still make it a struggle and perhaps you're not in that stage of recovery yet, but one day you will get there.

Remember, life vs. death. In the situations where you can apply this, try it. Whether it be with relationships, jobs, clubs and so on. At the end of the day anxiety is a battle, but let's still try to live life as much as possible. One day you'll get there!

"What would you do, if you knew you couldn't fail?" 
Best wishes and I hope you've had a lovely Christmas. Onto the new year! 
Amy xx