As many will know, we've hit 2014 and have said goodbye to 2013, which generally I'm glad to see the back of.


Each year I tend to set myself goals and resolutions, many which I tend not to stick to! But this year, I've made them more manageable and realistic. I think it's important to set goals, or even things you wish you've always done; like a bucket list. It's important to make sure you have something to strive to and even something you're looking forward to; as these things keep you going when you feel you want to give up. In true New Years fashion, I am going to share a few of my goals with you. Perhaps you can gain some inspiration and in return, you could always let me know some of yours. These are only a few picks, I have over 20 goals this year!
Become healthier: the typical goal that I never tend to stick to. However, I aim to be joining a boxercise club in the next few weeks, join my cycling club and perhaps do a bit of swimming. It may also be a good idea to complete a little exercise before I study, to increase productivity as the brain can concentrate better.
Pass my driving test: I started driving in October 2012 and passed my theory in January 2013. However, my anxiety has meant that I have had many breaks and haven't had lessons since June. I think it's important to get back to it, as I am only a few lessons off from my driving test; which I cancelled as I was too anxious. 
Give blood: it's something I've wanted to do for a long time, because I can! I feel giving life to someone, is an amazing thing and also an accomplishment for me too.
Toxic people: As I wrote in my get out of the darkness post; in order to improve your mindset, you must get rid of the drains. You don't need people in your life who are full of negativity, drama, generally take from you and pick you up when they need you and then drop you. You need people who you get on with, generally positive and who will support you. 
Stop feeding my anxiety: With health anxiety, I'm constantly thinking that there is something wrong with me, or that I am very likely to become ill on a daily basis. Anxiety sufferers are also prone to 'what if', meaning you question and analyse the situation, sometimes leading to a panic attack. In order to curb my anxiety, I need to stop voicing the possibilities and gain some control over them. Usually, I would discuss what I am feeling and what could happen, but it's important to know that the more you focus on something in regards to anxiety, the more anxious you will get and the more the feelings will develop.

What are your goals for 2014? 

Best Wishes,
Amy Xx