For many reading, exam season isn't too far away; don't worry, I can feel the dread too. Some of you have asked me how best to cope with this stress, so I have put together a few tips which may help you:

1. Organisation - this is the key. Knowing when to revise and what to revise, means you'll be better prepared. Create a revision timetable, make notes, diagrams and podcasts. The more organised you are, the more in control you will be. This is the one thing I find the most important when coping with exams.

2. The smaller picture - exams can become so overwhelming when you look at the big picture. I have seven exams this year. When I look at it all of my exams at once, I do begin to panic slightly. To reduce the stress and improve focus, look at a day to day basis. Figure out what you're going to revise each day and before you know it, you will have revised pretty much everything. Last year, I thought I wasn't going to have enough time to revise, but I did. One step at a time.

3. Exercise - I know many of us can't be bothered to exercise. On the other hand, some of you may feel you cannot spend any time doing anything else but revision. Exercise really helps to increase concentration. For example, I'll go for a quick run of about 20 - 30 minutes of an evening and the concentration and motivation I have drastically improves. Give it a go!

4. Balance - Don't be afraid to take a day or two off from revision. Your body needs to have a break now and then for the revision to be effective. Take some time to do what you enjoy; meeting friends, watching TV...

5. Communication - the pressure of exams can sometimes feel all too much, and hence why many go into meltdown; don't worry you're not alone! Make sure you have someone to talk to; a parent, teacher, friend or even charities will being willing to help you. There is a lot of support out there and don't be ashamed to talk. It will help you to think more logically and clearly.

For now, these are a few tips to try and reduce stress. Exam season is hard and you will feel the pressure, but just try the best you can. Small steps at a time. 

Good luck!
Amy xx