Hey all,

Apologies for the lack of blog post last week - I was moving back home from University for Easter. For today's blog post, I thought it would be a good idea to let you know of some upcoming opportunities for both you and I here at Relief From Anxiety.

Barclays legal tea
As some of you may know, I am studying Law at university and I am in my first year. As part of this there was an opportunity given by a firm called Aspiring Solicitors, to attend a legal networking tea in London next week, and with me trying to get out of my comfort zone and improve myself, I applied. I am very blessed to say that I got chosen, and will be travelling 4 hours to London next week, to Canary Wharf to meet a range of Lawyers and solicitors. To think that only two years ago, I couldn't leave the house and now I am going to London to further my career!

Relief From Anxiety Meet and Greet
In celebration of 50,000 views of my blog, I am setting up a Relief From Anxiety Meet up, where you can come and meet me, the writer and owner of this blog and hopefully share your support and mental health stories with other readers. This will be taking place in London in July, so please make every effort to attend. If you will be coming, please let me know. You can sign up to the event very soon. 

Mind Charity cycle through Germany
As many of you will know, I did a cycle through Germany last year in aid of Mind Charity, and this year I will be doing the same. Starting from Munich and cycling for four days in June. I would be ever so grateful if you could sponsor me. Last year we raised almost £180 - I really hope we can beat it this time! You can sponsor me, here.

Relate charity
I was recently contacted and called by Relate, the charity to write a piece for them for their new campaign. I am glad to say that this has been published on their website. You can read it, here.

My journey to a job and driving
Some of you may be aware, that the final two things on my recovery list and that I am petrified of, is a job and driving - both which I plan to accomplish this Summer. I am currently searching for a driving instructor and have applied for work experience. I will keep you updated!

I have my Summer exams coming up soon, so apologies if I am slightly absent from my blog. But as ever, I am happy to answer your emails at: reliefromanxiety@gmail.com

Best Wishes,
Amy Xx