Dear 16-year-old me,

You're made of tough stuff. You may not feel like it now, but I know you are. You're in the middle of your GCSE's and you're feeling like you're fighting a losing battle, but I promise if you keep working hard you'll get where you want to be. I'll be honest, that even if you try your absolute best, there is no guarantee that you will be at the top, but you will certainly be close if work hard at your graft. 

I know everyone is saying that life isn't all about exams and education right now, even though it feels like it is. If I could teach you anything right now, it would be that your mental health is the most important thing to look after during this time. There is so much pressure from the moment you get into school but please don't destroy your health over some exams. Just try your best, work hard and please look after yourself. It is not worth trying to end your life over. 

Those negative comments from your peers? There will always be those in your life. But, you're doing well to fend them off and have strong sense of belief which will carry you throughout your life and be really meaningful to you. In years to come, you'll remember these people and their negative comments, but it won't matter as much as it does now. You will be striving ahead to be where you want to be and perhaps they won't be. 

If you have the chance, spend more time with your family. You may still be in contact with some friends that you're with now, but your family is still important. Please don't get overwhelmed with everything in life to the point where you don't have much time for them as they won't be around forever. As you get older, the more you'll begin to realise this. Even if they drive you up the wall - just take a moment to think and put yourself in their shoes.

Try to save money and not spend it on things you don't need! It's actually really useful when you get older (!)

Finally, you've been through some rough times which you have faced head on and have come out of the other side. I'm not going to tell you that the future is going to be plain sailing, but just keep it in mind that you do have the strength to make it through, and through this journey you will meet some amazing people and will begin to understand what is really important in life. It's going to be a hard few years to get to where you want and keep your mental health stable, but you will get there and your hard work will pay off. You will grow, you will become more confident and you will get there. 

I am speaking from my 22-year-old self now and I am far away from knowing everything, but  I hope this would've been useful to you and any young person reading!

Keep going,
Amy xx