Well I didn't exactly travel the whole world as the title suggests, but I did manage to find my way from Germany back to London completely alone with anxiety right by my side. 

Actually, travelling anxiety has never been a major issue for me. However, battling my health anxiety and travel has. I once couldn't get on any form of transport in the fear I wouldn't be able to leave. Fortunately, with the help of CBT and medication, that fear is almost completely gone. Travelling is also something I love to do and I have traveled alone on various occasions. However, I have never gotten two trains in a different country on my own and gotten on a plane on my own, and this is something which I had to do to get out of the situation I was in whilst I was in Germany. I thought I would give you all some insight as to what it was like.

Travelling on the two trains themselves wasn't too much of an issue, it was more the worry of being on the right train and not knowing every aspect of the Germany language. However, pushing my anxiety out of my way, I managed to ask multiple times whether it was the right train and where my stop was (even some was spoken in German!) When I left my final train, I then had the ultimate struggle - to find my way through Munich airport, which is split into two massive and separate sections in which I got utterly lost. Luckily I was a fair few hours early, and I managed to find someone who could point me in the right direction. Even after been given instructions, I still got a little bit lost until I finally found the security checks. I would be lying if I said I wasn't at all anxious being alone in a massive queue, but I was pretty calm for travelling and being alone. Knowing that I had to rely solely on myself to get home, was fairly scary. However, going on a fair few planes in the past helped me to be acquainted with the situation too. After going through security I was out into duty free (woooooo!) and I just had to find my gate to my plane, which I luckily did. I got onto the plane wondering how the hell I managed it. 

If this experience has taught me anything, it's that you are way more capable than you can ever imagine and if you need to do something, you will. I never thought I could do it, but luckily I arrived safe and sound and I am proud!

You can do it!
Amy Xx