I was recently having a conversation about all of the things I wanted to do; all of the sports I wanted to try, the professions I wanted to work for, the people I wanted to meet. All of this has a common command word - 'I wish'.

I had never really taken any notice as to the words I was using when talking about the many things I wanted to accomplish, but it is very important. I've noted how many things I've wanted to do, but never really tried even though I have the capability to do so. I often hear myself saying; "I'm not musical, so I can't learn an instrument" amongst other things. It has taken other people to tell me, that it will take practice to learn and you can do it if you work hard at it. It is possible.

Instead, what I have to change it to, is 'I will'. I am fully capable to give kick boxing a go, or see my favourite artist live in concert. It's all about just going for it and giving it a try, or else you'll never know. In connection with my previous posts, there is so much that life has to offer and there is only so long we all have that we can experience it. For me, by using 'I wish'; I'm just thinking that I'll do it when I'm older or when I feel more confident. But the truth is, no one knows what's round the corner and no one knows what is guaranteed, so it's time for all of us to change 'I wish' to 'I WILL'. I'm not saying it's going to be easy; especially for us anxiety sufferers, but a time will come when you feel you can go for it.

Some of you may be reading this and thinking how 'naive' that we have the opportunity to do whatever we want in life. Of course, there will be difficulties in the way, but if you don't use your time wisely then the time will use you. "Time waits for no man". I know life can be rough, tough and horrible, but that doesn't excuse the possibility of accomplishing something you've always wanted to do. 

Why don't you start by writing a sort of bucket list and begin to do the things you've always wanted to; or work towards them?



Good luck!
Amy Xx