Life appears to revolve around society's expectations; what age you should get a job, the size of your body, how you should act. Of course, there are laws to follow and things we need to do as humans, but for the most part, society is just a construction that for some reason many of us seem to follow.

I have spoken to many of my friends who think that just because another person has done something that society deems as 'grown up', they are better than them. Definitely not. People develop at different times and what one person may be able to do at the age of 18, another may not. There may not be the right circumstances nor may you feel confident enough. Nor is the action "grown up" in everyone's eyes.


As the years went on in secondary school, the more I saw those around me following the crowd, which is great if that's what makes you happy. But, I know there were many who were just doing it to please others, and I somewhat felt like a bit of an outcast. There was so much pressure to fit in and change appearance; do things that deep inside they didn't want to do. I can't deny it's hard not to bow down to peer pressure, but as time goes by you'll be glad you didn't; if you felt it wasn't right for you. 

If a person has gotten a job, for example, that's brilliant. However, not everyone will feel ready to get a job and there is nothing wrong with that. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise. You are just as good as everyone else. As my mum says "you have the same right as anyone else to be on this planet" 

I think it's a great accomplishment if you undertake what you want to do, whether that be increasing your self esteem or getting a job; whatever makes you happy. But society is a construct and remember to look at and understand yourself first. There are bigger things in life, than what people think. Try not to compare and feel disappointed if you're not with the rest. You'll get there in your own time.

As I have said before "don't spend time caring about others opinions of you, as it will only hinder your journey and not their own". I know that this can be very hard to put into practice, but once you do, you will be able to be more of your own person. I've never followed the crowd, and perhaps that's why I got teased a lot at school. But at the end of the day, I am happy I've stuck with what I've believed in.

I know that with disorders such as social anxiety, it can be very hard not to care about what others think of you, especially with the images we are bombarded with in the media. I'm not saying it's going to be easy, as social anxiety is something I'm battling myself. But, the less you care about what others think of you, the more you'll enjoy your life. You only have one life to do what you want to do, just don't let it be hindered by other people's thoughts; it's not worth it. Remember; you have the same rights as anyone else. Let's all undertake the challenge! Go for it. 

Best Wishes,
Amy Xx