I'll be honest, I had no clue what to expect when I went to university. But, I feel that you may feel more prepared if you have some sort of a step by step process of how it all weeks. I presume most universities will be the same.


Friends - everyone is in exactly the same boat, so don't worry about not making friends. You'll meet new people left right and center. I was worried I wouldn't meet anyone, but there are thousands of new students, so it's never a worry. You will find someone.
Freshers - typically this is the best two weeks of your university life and I have to say i really enjoyed it. Try and get into it as much as possible; drinking doesn't have to be a part of it if you don't want to. All the events should already be organised, so don't worry about not knowing where to go.
Enrollment - You should have a few days where you'll pick up information for your course, ID badges and so. Your university will let you know the details of that. It's usually the first weekend of arrival and there are usually checklists online. It's a busy few days, but once it's done you don't have to worry about it anymore.
Accommodation - your university should tell you the dates that your able to move into your accommodation. From that day forward it's up to you to move your new life into your new room!
Lectures -  I think lectures tend to start on the second week of freshers. These are only usually introductory, and the main body doesn't tend to start until after freshers is over. 
Relaxed - university is unlike anything you've ever experienced. Depending on your course, attendance may or may not be registered in seminars or in lectures. And although you are paying to attend, it is generally up to you how much you attend. Of course, there is a correlation between low attendance and grades. But, university is all about your choices.
Societies - there will be hundreds of societies to join, I signed up to too many, so I am intending to stick to two or three at a time. Although, it's great to join, there is also a balance that needs to be struck with money and when the work starts to roll in (to be fair, isn't too much in the first year compared to others.)

You may feel like a big fish in a small pond, but you will begin to understand it all within a few days. Things will click into place. 

Amy Xx