What choice will you make?

As many of my readers are in post 16, and are at an age of leaving school, I thought it would be useful to begin my uni-life series, which will take you through a step by step process of university.

There are many life changing decisions we have to make in life and university can be one of these. It's not just young students that are considering taking this path, but mature students too. There are many possibilities with higher education; it's not all about the stereotypical image and can be far from it.

For many higher education students and for some mature students, university will be the main thing that is on their mind. It is a life changing decision after all. Nevertheless, I think it's extremely important to make an informed decision as to whether it's something you want to do, without buckling under the pressures of schools and parents. Therefore, I've decided to create a mini series in which I work through university step by step, including the decision making, UCAS, what happens on arrivals and the academics. Although my school gave me books full of information, nothing really prepared me for the whirlwind I was going to go through, which is the beginning of my first year of university.

Schools are putting a lot of pressure on students to go to university, but please don't let that sway you. Schools are only doing this to look better in the league tables, but of course there are teachers that should guide you in the right direction. You have to remember that by the time you reach the ability to decide university, you are at an age where you are in full control of your life. Don't let schools or parents make you do something that you don't want to do with your life. Of course, university has many benefits, but it's not always for everyone. It's up to you to weigh up the pros and cons.

There are so many opportunities besides university too, and please don't feel like a failure if you don't go to university as I know that's what many pupils think. There are full time jobs, apprenticeships, diplomas, and so on. Although, I feel I have made the right choice for me, it may be completely different for you and don't feel ashamed. Take your time to decide and make a choice that suits you.

Best wishes,
Amy Xx