I can't stand two faced people. Like I really can't stand them. I honestly believe that if someone is a bitch enough to put someone down, find the balls to say it to their face. 

I particularly hate two faced girls, they are the cruelest. Two faced girls do it to be liked, they're insecure and to feel better about themselves they put other people down. I've worked/studied in fashion retail for 10 years, I've met many an insecure bitch. 

Obviously everyone vents about other people, I can't claim to have never had a moan about someone else, maybe even a friend, but I would never slate a friend behind their back and be nice to their face. If I didn't like them enough to slag them off I would not be friends with them in the first place. 

The thing about two faced people that gets me the most is the lack of sincerity. How can I ever trust anything they say when they are quick to put someone else down? How can I ever be sure that person wouldn't turn on me in just the same way? 

All this is important to me because relationships are important to me. My friendships, my family - my complete support system is what literally gets me through life. I can't let fake, two faced, insincere people in my circle, it hurts me too much and over the last five or so years it has hurt me so much. 

Recently I was told that I can appear rude - initially this really upset me. I only ever want to get along with everyone and I would never intentionally be rude... Well, I would never intentionally be rude unless it was necessary, unless I was sticking up for myself or someone else I care about. I think I'm fair, I give people a chance, I don't follow other people's opinions, I speak as I find. 

For a while I was hating on this part of my personality, I was wondering if I was to blame for all sorts of fallouts and conflicts that I've experienced. But I've realised that's a good part of my personality, it's an honest, moral outlook. I'm extremely straight down the line, trustworthy and full of integrity. Nothing will ever come before those values.