My dating game has never been so good. It's been so good I've had to nickname it. My dating game is now called farming - myself being the farmer, these boys the crops. And boy oh boy, do I have a lot of vegetables a-growing.

If I were to count there would be at least 5 I am texting, snapchatting or Instagram flirting. These are the new tools of choice. Facebook chat is so 3 years ago. Tinder is a little old hat too now. I actually think the traditional meeting-people-on-nights-out is coming back. There's the meet, the number swap, the whatsapping, the snapchat and then a few weeks/months to the first date.

My crop is a mix of new meets and friends-of-friends. Most of which I am snapchatting with (I've been told by a 24 year old that my snapchat game is on point). Not all of my crops I have dated yet. I'm just sowing the seeds, putting on a little fertiliser, waiting until it's good enough the harvest...

I last dating two years ago. Back then I thought my skills were good, but I've recently evolved a few new ones. Here goes my revamped dating rules: 

Rule number 1: Opportunity knocks
Since my last boyfriend I've kept a list of every guy I've come across who I believe to be interested. Ok, so this might say more about my massive ego than these guys... but I believe there to have been a few. 

I've kept a record of every guy to have asked me out, regardless of whether I took up the offer and also a record of every guy I think had a flirt with me. It's really helped me see that opportunity really is everywhere, no matter how unemployed, unattractive or unsuitable he may be. When you really start to think about it, you get offers all over the place, sometimes you just don't see it. Go grab a pen and write your list. Delve into the real depths of your dating memory. I think you'll be pleasantly surprised.

Rule number 2: Don't be hasty
In the past I've been known to grab the ball by horns and go with my gut instincts; all or nothing. But let's face it, that hasn't got me very far. So instead, I'm doing the absolute opposite.

Now if someone is having a little flirt I totally entertain it, even if I'm not quite sure. I go with the flow for as long as possible, dragging out the texting before the first date, dragging out my replies and being the most aloof I have ever been. Not only is aloof along the lines of the classic treat-'em-mean-keep-'em-keen technique but it's also a really good way of sussing out the situ. It gives you time to figure out exactly what it is that YOU want and how you're going to play it. 

Recently I've been out and had a jolly nice evening with many a guy who I would in the past have simply tossed to the 'no' pile. I never gave these guys a chance, so now I'm making up for it. 

There is a line here though. There's not being hasty and then there's using the guy. Try not to do the later, it's mean and quite honestly really bad dating karma. It will come back to date you.

Rule number 3: Keep schtum
It's all well and good to gossip to your girls about the number of guys you're whatsapp dating, but never, NEVER confess to the guy. Not only does it make you sound a bit free with the emojis, but it most definitely will not make him feel good. Him not feeling good equals a no-go for any future flirt. Imagine if you were into a guy only to find out he's been snapchatting you the same pics he sends another girl... Not nice right?  

I have never been so cool on the dating front. I've never been so open minded, so carefree and have so many options. This is what dating should be about; being single and weighing up your options. In the past I've been so eager to jump into a guy I click with using the excuse that 'it just doesn't happen to me that often' but if I really REALLY think about it, I've clicked with quite a lot of guys over the last 10 years, maybe it's not just about the click.

Anyway, gotta go. My crops need a little attention.