My summer romance is hotting up and just like this current heat wave, I definitely plan to make the most of it - ha! Without meaning to sound smug, I have been having the most fun I ever have had dating! Who knew dating could be this fun? Certainly none of my ex snogs.

Over the past 6 weeks I have experienced the kind of dates you come to expect from watching any Ryan Gosling film and from reading all those airy-fairy chick lits. In the first few weeks we of course did the usual drinks/dinner/cinema thing, but this dude - Mr Boy - thinks outside the box. 

One Sunday evening he suggested a spontaneous BBQ (spontaneous because I have no garden and no BBQ, not because I think BBQs are all that wild). He drove over to mine, nipped to the shop and stocked up on BBQ goodies; disposable BBQ, burgers, sausages, Corona and of course the traditional BBQ essential - a pack of playing cards. We sat on the embankment of the river in my home town until 1130; eating, drinking and me losing at Rummy. I would go as far to say it was the best BBQ I've had all summer. 

Games have become quite a thing for our dates. By games I do actually mean real competitive games, not those type of games I'm used to playing with boys - the is-he-or-isn't-he-interested ones. No, no, no, proper games where there are actual written rules and everything.

Other games we have played as well as cards include bowling. Exactly like in Greese 2 we have donned those silly shoes and joyfully screamed 'Shoot the bowl!' - although I think I might be the only one who enjoys that reference. I'm not sure he's even aware of a Greese 2, in fact, I'm not sure he's even aware of a Greese 1 or John Travolta for that matter... Anyway, I was useless, but I really liked the shoes so we went back the following week where I embarrassingly got beaten again. 

I've tried to re-cover from my bowling embarrassment (my bowling ego is on the floor) by whipping out my pool skills. Thanks to my Dad and summer holidays as a child spent in Spain, my pool skills are not too shabby. Unfortunately I'm yet to win a game against this bowling/pool playing pro.

Then there was my games night. Four of us in total indulged in nachos and Camembert (something for every type of cheese lover) and a couple of jugs of Cosmo's before undertaking the most epic and drunken of games nights. Articulate, Heads Up and Bullshit were our games of choice, a nice mix I thought of tradition, modern technology and good old fashioned blasphemy. You can probably guess who came out triumphant.

How refreshing does all of the above sound? How lovely it is to actually have fun hanging out with someone without worrying about weather or not he is using me for sex, where this all is going and if he will even text me back the next day. I kind of feel that the beauty of him is that he is yet to be messed up by a chick, he hasn't experienced all the let downs and shit that I have over the last six years, he's all new and how lucky am I?!