This weekend I got told by my friend and her boyfriend;
"The worst thing to hear at a wedding is 'It'll be you next'"
To which I replied;
"No. The worst thing to hear at a wedding is 'You need to get yourself a boyfriend'"

This single-girl rant has probably been a long time coming. My biggest issue when it comes to everyone else's interest in my relationship status is why I have to justify my singleton-ness to anyone other than myself?

To be blunt, what's so bad about being single anyway? I get to watch as much Kardashian's as I like, decorate my flat in all things floral and get to see my girlfriends when ever the hell I like (as long as their boyfriends approve, obviously). Plus I get to fantasise about every guy I come across and wonder if he will be the one who I will fall madly in love with... OK, so I try to keep this little bit of crazy just in my head.

I am 25, not 45. This left on the shelf nonsense has got to stop. I am not exaggerating here, I have heard this phrase on more than one occasion quite recently.

I suppose I aspire to be fiercely independent, after all I am a result of the Girl Power generation. Also, lets not forget I graduated with a 1st Class Honours in the study of Sex and the City, getting exceptional grades in the importance of friendships over boys. I think I have always been influenced by strong, female role models. A big role model in my life is my Mother, she is most definitely the head of our house hold. She holds the purse strings, is very in-control and still makes all of the important decisions - including mine! She follows other strong women in our family too; her Aunt was an uncharacteristically strong women for her time. She was the main bread winner in her family unit and ran a workforce of seamstresses during the Second World War in London. I suppose I have always wanted to be a strong, independent, self sufficient female. I love fending for myself, I love answering to no-one but myself. I love that I am not putting up with a mediocre relationship because I am too scared to be alone. But it is important to note I am not exactly a loner; I am lucky to have my family around me who really do support me in everything I do.

Am I a feminist? I'm not too sure but to be honest I bloody hope I am. I admit that I do not know enough about feminism to say too much here, but what I believe the officially strapline to be is; a women's right to choice. A women's right to choose to be a stay at home housewife or not, to choose weather to have a family or not and to choose to be in a relationship or not. And at the moment my choice is not.

It has crossed my mind recently if I ever will get married. If I don't get married it wouldn't be through not meeting a guy who wants to marry me (have you read some of our Saturday night antics?!), but simply through my choice. Of course I want to get married and have a family but I may not choose that path when it actually comes down to it.

To put it quite simply; I have not yet met the man I deem worthy enough to remove myself from the market for. I have been told recently by several people that I am too fussy. Well, what a lovely position to be in. I think my teenage self would love to have been fussy about boys. Let's hope I pick well.