Just in case anyone has been left in suspense after my last post - I did go on the Tinder date. Much to the protest of my anxiety it went ok. He was ok. It was all just ok. I left the experience feeling glad with myself for giving it a go but with the knowledge that I wouldn't be in a hurry to put another date in the diary. Not just with this guy but with anyone. 

In the weeks that followed I realised how happy I was without all the worry of a guy. For the first time in ages I have felt content being single. The last thing I want is a guy to come along and mess with my equilibrium. I also realised that if the right guy did come along he wouldn't mess with my equilibrium at all, it would all be rather lovely and I would feel even happier. I think I'm done with wasting my time on guys who I know are no good for me. Maybe I have finally grown up, maybe I am finally content. 

Friends who I have spoken to about my latest realisation have suggested that perhaps this state of mind is the best to be in when looking to meet someone. I'm not sure about that. It sounds like an oxymoron to me; I need to feel content and happy being single to suddenly ditch all that when the next guy comes along. It's a bit like when people say 'you'll find someone as soon as you stop looking'. That entire concept gives hope to those desperately seeking a mate... I think even I've lost my train of thought.

I'm not being negative. Of course I would like to meet someone and spend my time with that one special person. I'm sure I will one day, but I'm happy as I am until that time. 

Instead of boys I'm spending my time dreaming about travelling. Since my last post I bit the bullet and booked my flights for my Californian adventure in September. The scary part was most definitely booking the flights. Now that bits done I can look forward to the sunshine, the road trips and the shopping. I'm hoping this trip is going to spark a travelling fire in me that I've never felt before. I'm hoping to come back feeling encouraged to give up this career malarky for a little while and hop on a plane to Oz. 

I always imagined I would spend the second half of my twenties travelling and exploring new places. I just imagined I would have someone to share all that with. Well so what, I don't. Perhaps I am meant to go alone, perhaps I am meant to find the courage within myself rather than in someone else. Hell, perhaps I'll get married in the little white wedding chapel in Vegas after all!