February the 14th is fast approaching. The one day many singletons dread whilst most couples can't be bothered with. It is a funny little holiday, who even bloody knows why we celebrate it?!

Most people see it as a money making scheme that companies like Clinton Cards, Thorntons and Pizza Express will reap the rewards of (after a quick wikipedia search their not actually that wrong). There is probably much more hype in the build up than in the actual Valentine's doing. There is also that question of why wait for that one day a year to send a love card or give a bunch of flowers; why not do it on a random day in July - bizarrely this is probably more romantic. Personally, I love entering into the spirit of anything (Bonfire night, Christmas, I even love Easter FFS) so something cute on February 14th would of course be welcomed.

Do girls put the pressure on for vday? I don't think there is any girl out there who wouldn't appreciate a little something for Valentine's Day, but by a little something I actually mean a thoughtful act of love from their guy that she didn't have to ask for or even hint at. For some girls just a cuppa tea in bed from their man would probably do. A Valentine's 'don't worry I'll take the bin out' would be the best gift someone could give me. But on the flip side I am sure out there somewhere are the crazy girls expecting it all; 12 red roses, the entire Hotel Chocolat, dinner on top of the Eiffel...

I've only had a few Valentine's with guys. Actually I remember two with Mr Reliable, but none with Mr Rebellious (although I do remember buying him a truck load of orange club biscuits and wrapping them in a bow, I obviously received nothing). I have never bought into all the fuss, I've kept it low key but I do like the idea of doing something nice and lovely. Just a lovely little thing to raise a lovely little smile.

I can however distinctively remember two amazing Valentine's evenings spent with the girls. The first one in my second year of Uni, the four us went to our favourite pizza place called Croma just of Albert Square in Manchester. There was a lot of wine involved and we were obviously the best table in the place. The second also involves pizza, wine, cocktails and a massive hangover on the 15th. There seems to be a theme here.

This year? Well obviously I am single but also in that weird 'seeing someone' camp. What is the deal here?! To be honest I'm not too bothered, all this talk of love is a bit weird when things are still so casual. However I do know that I will be seeing my girls, after all they have been the best boyfriends over the past year. We have planned an evening of cheese, wine and silliness - sounds like the best kind of vday to me. Hmm, the only thing that could top that would be a vday booty call to end the evening. Do Clintons to a card for that?