How about a little story time?
I love watching those youtube story time's and to be honest I kinda wished I had a channel simply for the purpose of sharing this story.

I'm not even sure where to start. Well, I will say for those of you who might not know. I am holed up in a drafty, smallish farm house. Somewhere west of nowhere and east of all civilization. It's cold on the good days and below freezing on the bad. The internet goes out more than I do, and my phone consistently drops calls.

The water tastes funny and has a yellow film in it, that leaves rings in the sinks, bathtub, and cups.
I boil it and put it in the fridge for an hour before sipping a drop. I am still convinced if I die it is because of whatever lurks unseen in the water. Alas, not even the water is reliable, it takes almost an hour to fill the tub and cleaning has to be done around whenever it decides to reappear.

We have all gotten used to half washed clothes and running the washer at least twice.

I thought after living here for no less than three months, I had dealt with all this house could possibly throw at me. Plugged sinks, burst water pipes, stuck cars, snow storms, and a door freezing shut. That last one required four hours, two blow dryers, some dedication, and a screwdriver.

I was gaining a bit of confidence, I had cooked a perfectly moist turkey, put in some smoke detectors, and laid out some mouse traps. People say I am not independent, puh, what do they know.

I had thought I was on the road to complete self reliance. Until one rather calm, and boring night. Nothing bad had happened that day it had been sometime after eleven when I finally gave into the call to sleep. I was sleeping peacefully, until I was woken by my cat.

She was running at full speed between my room and the kitchen. Back and forth, like some kind of game. I sat up intending to end the madness with a well placed pillow.

Only to see her chase an alarmingly large blob into my room. I wasn't wearing my glasses and for a brief moment, I had the terrible thought that it was a spider. I was no longer sleepy, I was terrified. I threw my glasses on and flicked the flashlight on my phone on.

My cat was digging through the stacks of books that make up my book tree. She has done that nearly every night, and I never once thought something could be hiding in between them.

Something jumped up onto them, it was a beady eyed big eared mouse.

I am not usually scared of mice, but this one looked more like a rat, it was really late, it was sitting on my books, on my precious books.

Even though it was five in the morning and we are two hours ahead of my parents. I did what any scared, very independent, young adult would do. I texted my Dad.




  At least my Dad still has his humor, even at three in the morning.

Loki chased it around for a good hour, with me encouragingly screaming 'get it, get it'  before she finally trapped it under my bed. I heard a sickening crack, and that was the end of the mouse. I had to grab it from her, before she could eat it, and I placed it outside the front door in a plastic bag. Due to the strong wind it was gone,when I looked for it at an more decent hour.


 My hero!