    So it's time for the second round of Beautiful Books, a link up hosted by Cait and Sky who I would suggest following as they will make your blogging experience both funny and enjoyable.






Now for the questions. I'm going to use 'Kiss My Eyes' because that is the one that is causing me the most stress

1. Is the book turning out how you thought it would be, or is it defying your expectations?

It has definitely taking some turns I wasn't expecting, and some of the character's just went off on their own, so I would say it's surprising me.

2.What’s your first sentence (or paragraph)?


                                                                          There was an unexpected guest at my birth, that guest was a maligned tumor.

3.  Are you a plotter or a pantser? Have you ever tried both methods and how did it turn out?

Definitely a panster, I get vague ideas of where I want the story to go, and I wing it from there. It's more fun.

4. What do you reward yourself with after meeting a goal?

Coffee and Pinterest, and maybe some video games.

5. What do you look for in a name? Do you have themes and where do you find your names?

Sound and feel always seem to come first, I do like to look up meanings and origins. I make up my own names sometimes.

6. What is your favourite to write: beginning, middle, or end -- and why?

End, the words start to fly at the end, it's like I get a second wind. I finish it, and then I flop around for the next two years and do nothing.

7. Who’s your current favourite character in your novel?
  
*sheepish smile* My Goblin King, who's part is almost over and he still doesn't have a name. He is scary, creepy, and intriguing. I have a soft spot for him.

 

 






8.What kind of things have you researched for this project, and how do you go about researching? (What’s the weirdest thing you’ve researched?!)

Weirdest was probably synonyms for the word 'hiss' I was abusing it. I also researched alot about castle walls, layouts, and what they were made of.

9. Do you write better alone or with others? Do you share your work or prefer to keep it to yourself?

Probably better alone, but I tend to plant myself where there are people or things going on. Like the kitchen table or the couch.

10. What are your writing habits? Is there a specific snack you eat? Do you listen to music? What time of day do you write best? Feel free to show us a picture of your writing space!

 I eat anything I can get my hands on, tons of tea and coffee too. I write best as soon as I wake up and before noon. I sometimes need silence, but most often I listen to music. A strange blend of techno, pop, rock, heavy metal/ scremo, country, and soundtracks, almost every genre really.

This song has been perfect for my Goblins.

 


 