 So I have been missing these the last few months, but Starting Sparks is an awesome linkup hosted by Emily and Ashley

  They are both wonderful bloggers, so go check them out. Do join up if you get the chance, it goes till the end of the month.


 The destructive tinkling of shattered glass on marble floor, followed a slammed door.

"William! That better not have been the good teacups." I yelled.

His silence was more than an answer.

I banged on the door, "Isn't there a better way to deal with your anger, than by smashing things."

"If there is I have yet to find one." He shouted.

"It's childish." I sighed, as if I could expect more from him.

His answer was more smashing.

"Is this necessary!" I shouted, banging on the wood door.

"Absolutely," his sardonic tone though muffled still rang through.

"Really" I huffed, opening the door that he had failed to lock.

He looked at me in disgust, his eyes rimmed red. Not with tears of course that was too much to expect, but from whatever alcoholic beverage he was drinking down.

I put my hand on my hip and stood in silence until he was forced to acknowledge my presence.

He pulled the bottle from his lips with an eyeroll. "What?"

I sneered, "You could at least use a glass."

He plopped into a chair, and gestured at the floor, "I've broken them."

"Yes, I know, why" I was trying my best to be calm and rational, one of us needed to keep our heads and it wasn't going to be him.

"I rather not discuss why." He said dipping his head back for another drink.

I shook my head, "No, no  you are not going to do this to me again." I launched myself at him, and grabbed the bottle.

He tried to snatch it back, even resorted to pulling my hair, but I untangled myself and fled to the other side of the room. Tripping on glass shards on the way.

He looked wretched as he glared at me. "Your cruel."

I held out the bottle and sniffed it, rum. "I only want you to talk to me, why do you never talk to me."

He shook his finger at me, "No. Not you. Anyone but you."

"Why not." I said, the playfulness fell from my words.

He turned back to the scarred table, because you are the last person I want to see..."

I tried to keep the pain out of my expression. "Oh"

I almost dropped the bottle, "Well I guess I will leave you to it then."

He inhaled sharply, "That's not what I meant. I mean I don't want you to see me." He raked a hand through his hair, seeming to find speaking and eye contact difficult.

"Like this." He whispered gesturing to himself, glancing at me only to confirm my presence. "Vulnerable, broken, weak..."He slammed his fist down punctuating his last words.

I inched closer, "Why?"

His gaze met mine, "I just said..."

"No I mean why."

His face screwed up in confusion it was a good look for him.

"Why don't you want me to see you."  I tilted my head at him, "You look the same to me."

It wasn't the response he was expecting, a small smile teased at the corner of his mouth.

He still seemed unsure, "There is just so much-"

"I know, and it's okay." I stood only a foot away now, "It's okay to be those things."

I brushed off the top of the bottle with my sleeve. "In fact your more human now, then I have ever seen you." I took a small sip.

He watched me curiously, something flickered in his eyes. He stood up,and closed the gap between us.

"Really," he said with a devilish grin, smiling down at me like the proper rogue that he was.

I stepped closer, our noses were almost touching, "Yes," I hissed, "Still every bit a cad."

His hand grazed mine as he unceremoniously ripped the bottle from my hands, and clumped back to his chair. He raised the bottle in my direction, "And you are nothing like the desperate damsel I asked for."

I raised my invisible glass in turn and we toasted.

That was how we spent the evening on opposite ends of the long table, with both of us making a point ignoring the shattered glass.





I think they need marriage counseling personally, but they seem to be okay.