As I have been battling this character for the past few months. I thought having you guys interrogate him would help on the writing front. Also he confused the heck out of all my beta readers. Most of them didn't know how to take him. To be honest, he likes it that way. I'm not sure he will answer honestly, and for those of you who don't know who he is.

He is my fae prince, who played  the role of Prince Charming in my Snow White retelling. His family reigns over the Northern regions and is ridiculously wealthy.

Thanks to everyone who asked questions! You guys are awesome! I'm going to let him answer these questions as honestly as I can. He also lies, so I wouldn't believe anything he says.

I might censor him a bit *glares*





1. Who do you value most in the world? (Besides yourself. *wicked grin*)


 "Going straight for the heart, are we. I'm not drunk enough to answer this."


"Her name was Sirena."

 "That was after only one drink, that's not actually her name is it?"

*silence* 

2. What got you started smoking?

"I started when I started drinking... Boredom was most likely the cause."


 
He was underage for sure!


3. How were you raised exactly?

 "In an unorthodox and amoral family with impeccably high standards."



Now even I am curious.

4.What's his most prominent childhood memory?

 "Probably the day I came into my inheritance, fangs were involved. A family trait, I'm told."


He is not a 'vampire'! Since he insist in being all vague, I will explain. His family is part of the shape shifting fae, Snake was their animal of choice. He also can't turn into a full snake... I don't even know how to explain it.

"Perhaps you shouldn't butt in. *slides glass* Drink your juice."

 
 5. Who and where is his mother? 


"Was not expecting that one... Her name is Alice, and I'm not permitted to tell you our last name. Supposedly, it's crucial to the plot. I think that means the author hasn't thought of it yet."

"So I'm bad with last names, shoot me!"

"Gladly!"

*muffled screaming*

"As to where she is, our estate is expansive. She is most likely avoiding my father and terrorizing one of the maids."


 6. What do you find attractive? (this could be a trait in a person, or an object, or whatever....)







 "Just answer the bloody question."

"Of course you would take all the fun out of it."

"We're waiting..."

"It's a hard question to answer with you glaring at me. I know what you want me to say, so I'm going to have to disappoint you..."

*glaring*

"Innocence, probably because it's so rare and confidence. A beautiful face and body are also appreciated for obvious reasons."

"So close..."


6. Would he rather enter a room on a fluffy pink unicorn or a fluffy pink pony?



"Should I take a drink every time someone asks an idiotic question?"



"You've been drinking the whole time!"


"Ah, your catching on."


7. Least favorite food?

 "Human, it's too tough and gets stuck in the teeth."

   
 "He's kidding... right"






8. Favorite thing to do on your day off? 

"Glad you asked...

"Nooooo, we are not going there!"

"I didn't get to answer the question."

"Exactly, your catching on."


 
9. What makes you lose your cool? 

"When someone threatens anyone close to me."




  
10. What kind of person do you look for as a spouse?

"I don't."







 11. What scares you?

"Nothing."




12. Have you ever loved someone? Like, for no gain to yourself no backdoor scheme, just because?

"With love there is always collateral damage. I prefer to refrain."


 
13. What are your biggest fear(s)? 



"Again, an unfortunate question that won't get an answer."

 14. Is there anyone you really care about?

"Not sure I like what this question implies."



"I don't know what you expected."


15.  What would make you truly happy?



"A host of terrible and atrocious things. Unlimited power would be nice."

"How very super villain of you."

"I knew you wouldn't approve."


16.Why do you have a more human side when the Fae world is so evil and with how you must have been raised?

"I don't. I appeal to people's sympathies when it suits my needs. I manipulate, it seems I have fooled you if you think that highly of me. I am the monster they created me to be, I don't claim to be more than that. "






17. How were you raised exactly? 

"Terribly."





18. What do you spend most of your time doing?

"Drinking, smoking, overthrowing kingdoms."

"Oh, is that all."

"Well for a weekday."






19. What is your ultimate aim in life?


"To escape."


 "One bottle, that's what it takes for you to start being honest."

"Not one...I was drinking before we started..."

*exasperated sighing*

 
20. So, where did you get the Teddy Bear?

"I don't know if it's the drink, but what is she talking about?



"It was mine, he stole it. I better leave him alone now."


 Hope everyone enjoyed that!














 