I love getting tagged, but I am horrible at actually doing them.
Anyone else relate.

Also I never follow the rules or continue the tag. In short I am a horrible blogger.

D.J @ Silver Phoenix tagged me. She has a great blog, go check it out!


The Questions

 
1. If given the choice between playing a board game and a video game, which would you choose?
  Video game every time. Growing up at the tail end of the nineties, that was a big pastime. Lately, I have been lost in the amazing game that is 'Zelda: Breath of the Wild' 





2. Does the idea of a coastal beach or a cabin in snowy Montana sound more appealing to you? 

Since I already live in snow drenched Canada, the coastal beach sounds good. 

  3. Are cats constantly devising a way to eat you?
  Without a doubt, they are eviiillll!
     4. Writing or reading?
    I want to say writing, but reading. I am always reading something.
    5. Would you rather be stuck in an elevator with your villains, or be the villain of your hero?
  Good one! I would like to be stuck in an elevator, it would be equal parts humorous and terrifying. Also some of them are attractive. They would either offer me a drink or kill me. 


Kill, they would definitely kill me.

  6. What would you do if you woke up in your story world?
   Best question. It would depend on the world, I have a few. I will choose my most recent one 'Falling Snow' I would go to the circus, and enjoy the acts. Eat all the delicious food, like caramel apples. Give Chayse a hug, after watching his fire act. Give Snow some money and advice. Then probably run away with Cynfael...
  7. How many times have you looked at a book and put it back on the shelf?
  So many times, mostly because I am broke.
   8. Library or bookstore? 
  Bookstore, we have some cute used ones. The nicer one has a Starbucks. 
  9. When given the choice between Batman and Spiderman, who would you choose to save your main character?
  This is hard, I love both. Probably Batman, because in order to save my MC he is going to have to kill someone. 
   
10. Star Wars or Lord of the Rings?
  I love both! If I had to choose, probably Lotr. The books and movies are epic.
It's close though... I mean Star Wars has Han Solo and Kylo
        11. What name would you give your blog in an alternate universe? 
  Castles of Ink ( which might've been better)
 
 



 