Guess who has been posting somewhat regularly.

* Crickets*

Me, I have I know this sounds stupid, but I am pretty proud of myself. I went from once or twice a month to almost everyday.  That's what I call progress, but at the same time I am thinking maybe it was better when I only posted once a month because then you guys couldn't get sick of me. Now maybe it's too much, maybe I am annoying you. * Falls into a pit of second guessing and anxiety*

Okay on to the review, So I love Retellings. I am sure I've mentioned this before.
I also happen to like twisted and darker retellings, I am morbid like that. So when I saw this sitting on a shelf, I snatched it up.
 Synopsis
  
I didn't ask for any of this. I didn't ask to be some kind of hero.

But when your whole life gets swept up by a tornado - taking you with it - you have no choice but to go along, you know?


I had heard mostly good things about it, and though I have never read the original, 'Oz', and I was never fond of the movie. The witch scared me to death when I was four, and I hate musicals. I did like the new movie that just came out, with James Franco, but I forget it's name.

I decided that this looked like a book I would enjoy, I mean Dorthy needs to die, count me in.

I read it in about a day, which is a usual thing for me and it flowed nicely, the writer  knows her stuff and I have to give her props for a great idea. The world is dark and twisted just like I was expecting. Everything is upside down, so you guessed it, all the character's that you know as good are evil, and all the evil character's are somewhat good.

Wicked is good, I think Amy actually says this at some point in the book, which was a little too 'Maze Runner' for me.

I liked Amy, she grew up in a trailer park with a alcoholic mother, and despite her insecurities she makes for a strong protagonist, who shows a lot of gumption in some pretty scary situations. The only thing that bothered me about her was her  potty mouth, and I figure it was to add realism, but I don't see any reason why young adult novels need to be spewing the F-word.

I like Pete, he was the one character I really liked, he wasn't in the book much, but he seemed to really want to help Amy.

I also loved, loved that there was no love triangle, Thank you Danielle Paige. I am worried that there might be in the second one though.

I also really enjoyed how the evil character's weren't evil for evil's sake and how it was explained how they all became that way.

I did like Nox, but he came off as arrogant, and I know he is supposed to be like the bad boy type and that's their thing, but I really didn't like him as much as I should've. I also felt that him and Amy and zero chemistry, I mean they verbally and physically spared for the whole, book. I knew Amy liked him, but can't remember him doing anything to show that he actually liked her. So when they kissed, I literally couldn't have cared less.

My biggest problem was nothing surprised me in this book, everything happened more or less how I assumed it would. I do want to  say that I think Danielle Paige is a great writer, and I will be reading the second one so that's something.

I guess I liked this book, but I didn't love it. I would give it three stars.

(Pros)

Evil Dorthy

Good Female Protagonist

No love Triangle

Creepy Version of Oz

(Cons)

Swearing

Violence (Doesn't bother me, but it might bother some people)