Okay I'm not sure how to review this movie, but I can tell you one thing I absolutely loved it!
 Keep in mind as you read my thoughts. That I love action movies, zombie movies, thrillers. Basically blood and guts don't faze me. I grew up with two older brothers, in my mother's eyes they ruined me, but I think they saved me from being a sentimental fool.







I have a funny story about my first encounter with Pride and Prejudice and my first reaction to it. I think I was twelve when I watched the movie version with my mom. I was bored out of my mind, and the only thing that amused me was quoting Pirates of the Caribbean because Kiera Knightly was in it.



I abhorred anything even remotely romantic, from a very young age.

When my mom asked me if I liked it, I said that if it had some action or a tragic death. I might like it.
cue nine years later my requests were answered.

I sadly haven't read the book, but I'm going to snatch it up at the next time I see it.

I had planned to see this movie with two of my cousins or my dad. We share almost exactly the same taste in movies and t.v. I was pleasantly surprised when my mom decided to take me, and slightly worried. I guess I should give you a brief history of my mom and I.

From age seven we have been at odds, she wanted me in dresses with frills and I decided pants were much more my thing. It only got worse as I got older and preferred murder mysteries, car chases, explosions, fight scenes to the sappy, kissing filled shows all my friends loved.  I loved video games of all kinds, but first person shooter games quickly became the favorite, but my mom didn't like me to play them because they were violent. We learned to accept each others differences, but we still fight over them. Lovingly of course.

So when she said she would take me so we could spend some much needed time with each other before she flies of to Africa, I said 'sure', but kept thinking of the huge lecture that would follow the movie. For most of the day after that I tried relentlessly to talk her out of it.

"You know it's about Zombies, right?"

"It will probably be very gory."

"Zombies, blood and guts."

"There might be a beheading or language."

"You screamed watching Mockingjay part 11, this will be far worse."

"Did I mention zombies!"

She didn't take the bait and said even though she probably would close her eyes through most of it, she was going to see it for me. I admired her stubbornness and gave up trying to convince her and we went.

After loading up on popcorn and pop, we found our respective screen. My mom tsked at the Zombie on the screen displaying our movie, and I groaned inwardly about what a terrible idea this was. She and my cousin exchanged scared smiles as we took our seats.

The first preview was unfortunately some horror movie of the demon possessed variety, and while I read my popcorn bag. My cousin and my mom hide behind their fingers and took fearful peaks, then discussed loudly how bad it was.

I was slightly amused, but hoped that the preview had nothing in common with the movie.

I knew they were nervous from the very start, which starts with a cartoony puppet way of explaining how the zombies came to be. Because my cousin had my arm in a vice like grip, and as soon as it started my mom asked me to ask my cousin about what she thought of the new movie theater.

I for one was excited. My mom was happy to find that there was a story apart from the zombies, hence the name. Whoever thought of combining the two was really clever. I wish I had thought of it.

There is something funny and inspiring about having 19th century edict mixed with zombie slaying. Seeing girls in prim and proper dresses, be fluent in the art of war. That in between the dancing, parties, and Victorian manners, there is blood and corpses.



 Lily James made a fantastic Lizzie, and after a brief scene both my mom and cousin were like, there you are, Skye. I wish, the only common trait we share is, we both have no desire to marry, and the brown hair.


 Despite the fact of this film being peppered with zombies, it wasn't as gory as I anticipated. You see as much as zombies and action movie type violence doesn't bother me. I'm not really a fan of gore, excessive blood and flying limbs aren't my thing. I think the film makers weren't trying to make this movie excessively bloody or scary, which I appreciate.

That's not to say there isn't any, blood splatters the camera quite regularly,but I like how even thought someone is slashing someone's head the quick cuts and camera angles shy away from the actual act.

The zombies themselves were quite creepy. At one point there was a zombie mother and baby. To which my mom responded "That's not holy!"

It's was such a funny thing to say, so me and my cousin burst out laughing. We ended up doing a lot of that, as there was a lot of humor, and sassy dialogue. Most of the comic relief came from Mr. Collins played by the wonderful Matt Smith.

He was my favorite, my cousin's response to him was "Who is the weird looking person!"

I was like, "That is the 11'th doctor, peasant!" well not really, but I did defend him. To which my mom was like, "Please tell me he is not the one you like." to which I was all like "Yes, but not like that..."

That's the problem with people who don't watch Doctor Who, they will never understand my love for the Doctor.

All of the character's were fantastic actually, and as far as I remember kept true to the original.



They had all the great parts of  Mr. Darcy's and Lizzie's unromance, I quite liked them. Which begs the question is there anyone more awkward then Mr. Darcy?


To sum it up I loved it, my cousin loved it, and my mom would have liked it if it weren't for the zombies. So basically she should just stick to Pride and Prejudice. She was a good sport about it regardless.

I think I might read the original book now. So if anything this show might have turned me into a Jane Austen fan. You never know.

   Final thoughts: It was bloody lovely!












 