Okay I am one of those terrible people who could care less about Valentine's Day, but I saw this and couldn't resist doing the link up.

So Sky@ Further up and Further In and Cait @ Paper Fury do this thing, and I have never participated, but it seemed like a perfect thing to do on Valentine's Day. I am going to use Belle and William as the lucky victims.



 1. How long have they been a couple?

Half a year, if you count the time we spent rebuilding the castle.

Since I first saw her...

No, you were incorrigible.


2. How did they first meet?  

The usual way-

Usual you forced me to come to your castle, on my father's life. There was nothing usual about it.

Usual, to some people.

Who, ogres.

Perhaps.

 3. What were their first thoughts of each other? (Love at first sight or “you’re freakishly annoying”?)

Well as I said, I was forced to meet him so as I was a captive, I positively hated him.

Hate is a strong word, Love

It's the truth, what about you.

Perhaps a different question.

No, I want to know what you thought of me.


 I was expecting a blonde

... Liar


4. What do they do that most annoys each other?

You prattle constantly

I do not! Your the one who hides away from rest of the world. Your arrogant and think you are some kind of King.

There it is.

5. Are their personalities opposite or similar?

I think we are fairly similar, wouldn't you agree Belle.

Oh, am I allowed to talk now.

  6. How would their lives be different without each other?

Well, I for one would obviously be better off.

And I would still be a bloody Beast.

What a shame that would be.

Tsk, sarcasm is not you forte, Darling

7. Are they ever embarrassed of each other?

Yes, he gets bored at the market. So he steals food and magics things.

Is magics a word? I for one have never been embarrassed of her, even when she tripped and fell into a mud puddle because she had her nose in a book. You wore the mud well.

Shush, you oaf and remove your arm.

8. Does anyone disapprove of their relationship?

Your Mother despises me.

Only because you insulted her.

I merely commented on her size, I was being honest.

There was no need to comment on her hips.

She irks me.

The feeling is mutual then.


9. Do they see their relationship as long-term/leading to marriage?
Yes Will, where do you think our relationship is heading.

I thought you would leave me after you got to know me and I would have to find some wench.

Well I haven't yet so when do you plan on marrying me, people have began to talk.

Old Abigal doesn't count she talks about everyone, besides we sleep in separate wings, your choice not mine. There is nothing to talk about.

Of course we sleep in seperate wings, we're unwed, but if you married me that would no longer be an issue.

When you put it like that I feel more inclined.

10. If they could plan the “perfect outing” together, where would they go?

William insist the we need to go to Ingary to have tea with Howl and Sophie Pendragon. Howl taught him most of what he knows

It would be lovely, we could get a cream cake at Cesari's  
 

I hope you guys enjoyed it.