I feel kinda late to this party for some reason. My blog feed was all Beautiful People, not that I'm complaining I love it, but you all made me feel bad for procrastinating. So here are my much anticipated answers... cough.







So this is a linkup hosted by the world dominating Cait 


and the equally as amazing, marvel loving Sky


1. What were your writing achievements last year?

Well this is...


 I blanked... ummm I did a 20,000 word contest entry, and blog posts and not much else. *hides under blanket*


2.  Tell us about your top priority writing project for this year?

Ummm


It's those stupid eyes, 'Bleeding Roses.' ( I hope you are happy William)

3. List 5 areas you’d like to work the hardest to improve this year.

Just five.

1. Editing ( It's my greatest weakness)

2. Rewritng (Something I never seem to do)

3. Writing (Something I talk about more than I do)

4.  World Building (I think I need to start creating more depth)

5. Query ( Actively try to get published)


4. Are you participating in any writing challenges?

At the moment no, but you never know. 


5. What’s your critique partner/beta reader situation like and do you have plans to expand this year?

I had about eight or nine beta readers last year, but besides two of them. I'm not sure how many of them would be willing to read for me again. I am thinking of adding a book page to this blog, and letting whoever want's to read, whatever I'm working on. So I guess, I do plan on expanding. As for critique partners, shout out to Jocelyn, Tracey Dyck, Ashely G,
 They all edited for me, and made beautiful comments, that made me feel amazing. All of my beta readers were amazing, but these three went above and beyond.

Jocelyn- All those late night Skype conversations about our characters. I will never forget them, especially the one when we decided that William was such a drama queen, that 'Tik Tok' should play whenever he walks in a room.

Tracey- You are so sweet! You put me at ease about the contest, and boosted my confidence. You also did a line edit, a line edit! Still don't know how to thank you hopefully I can repay the favor.

Ashely- I had the biggest smile every time I read one of your emails. Your fangirling about Aden, was the best. You also gave me great editing advice that made my story feel complete and done, plus you gave me that killer idea for the end.

6. Do you have plans to read any writer-related books this year? Or are there specific books you want to read for research

Not really, but I do want to read a few marketing books.

7. Pick one character you want to get to know better, and how are you going to achieve this?

It's a toss up between these two

His name is Peter, he is a vampire, and Dracula's grandson.

or

Walter, a sarcastic zombie.

 8. Do you plan to edit or query, and what’s your plan of attack?

I will do all the things, and attack everything.


9. Toni Morrison once said, “If there’s a book that you want to read, but it hasn’t been written yet, then you must write it.”  What are the books that you want to see more of, and what “holes” do you think need filling in the literary world?

I think we need more clean fantasy novels or just any genre really. I read a lot of great books this year, that we're well written, with amazing characters. Yet, there were things that made me not like them. Language and other content, that was way out of my comfort zone. I was actually surprised at what is considered okay now for teens to read. I'm 21 guys and I still hide behind pillows when people kiss on T.V. For books I just skip pages. I guess I will have to get writing to fill that void.

10. What do you hope to have achieved by the end of 2016?

EVERYTHING!

Seriously though that would be nice. I would love to have a book deal, and at least five completed books to query, and a published eBook. We will see.

 



 




  