Glasses - Rayban // Foundation stick - Bobbi Brown // Lipgloss - Tanya Burr // Perfume - Jo Malone
8hr Cream- Elizabeth Arden // Dry shampoo - Batiste // Phone and card holder - Michael Kors //Purse - Kurt Geiger // Iphone 4s // Sunglasses - Topshop


Elizabeth Arden 8 Hour Cream: Ladies, if you haven't heard of this god send then where have you been?!?! Elizabeth Arden Eight Hour Skin Protectant is a skincare classic, praised by beauty editors, makeup artists and models, that helps to restore, calm and relieve chapped, cracked and dry skin. But that's not all it can do! This little gem has a multitude of uses - lip balm, eyebrow tamer, hair treatment, moisturiser, highlighter...the list goes on! I adore this product so much that it has earned a permanent spot in my handbag! It smells a bit funky but is nonetheless still a staple in my beauty regimen.

Jo Malone Perfume in "Blackberry and Bay": Anybody who knows me knows that this is my scent! It is the only perfume that I haven't got sick of and can wear confidently all year round! It's got a sweetness that's perfect for the summer months and a warmth that works well in the winter. Staying power isn't amazing- so I be sure to keep a 30ml size in my bag to top up throughout the day.

Michael Kors Phone Case: This was a treat from my boyfriend which has turned into a handbag staple. It fits my phone in perfectly as well as having a pocket for loose change and slots to fit your most used cards. This is great for keeping my bag neat but also great to grab if i'm just nipping to the shops..or the chippy, if I don't want to bring a huge bag out with me!

Batiste Dry Shampoo: A fab pick me up for dull/flat hair throughout the day! Also great for carrying around to combat "second day hair!"

Bobbi Brown Foundation Stick: I'm a huge fan of Bobbi's Long Wear Even Finish Foundation which claims to last 12 hours, but most definitely doesn't (perhaps because my skin is more on the oiler side), so this little stick is perfect for touch ups throughout the day.

Tanya Burr Lipgloss "Chic": My favourite gloss from her collection. This colour goes great with any makeup look so is perfect for keeping in my bag instead of bringing 12 different lipsticks/glosses out with me daily!

Kurt Geiger Purse: This was actually gifted to me by the lovely ladies from the Kurt Geiger Press department after completing my internship with them. It's a lovely little reminder of what I achieved and how much fun I had down in London working for them!

Topshop Sunnies: My inner diva always needs sunnies! Because who says sunglasses are only for summer...

Rayban Glasses: Because I really should wear them all the time but forget so they live in my bag.

Iphone 4s: My life source! 

RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
♡Review: Rimmel Stay Matte Foundation♡ | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE