X Factor season has crept up on us once again and the only thing I can think about whilst watching the thousands of hopefuls sing their hearts out, in search for their 15 minutes of fame (or five years of fame if you're One Direction), is how absolutely INCREDIBLE Cheryl Fernandez-Versini (Cole) looks! Her makeup has been looking stunning recently but the one look that really caught my eye was the smokey bronze "cut crease" look she was sporting on Saturday night. I decided to attempt a slightly more toned down version of her makeup but if you wanted the full on Cheryl look- some falsies and some black shadow will do the trick!

The most stand out part of Cheryl's look was her very defined cut crease. I created this by applying brown eyeliner (use black for a stronger, smokier look) right on the crease of my eye and blending to create a soft but very prominent and defined crease. I applied a soft brown transition colour above this, working towards my brow bone, and smoking out the outer corners of my eye with a deep, rich brown eyeshadow. I then applied a mix of MAC's "Woodwinked" and "Naked Lunch" on my lids and smoked out some brown liner on my lower lash line and water line. Again, you could use black for a more dramatic look. Next it was liquid liner, mascara and a cream coloured shadow on my brow bone to highlight et voila! Eyes are complete!!

To finish off my face I contoured my cheekbones, bronzed up my skin and added a pink lipstick with slight orange undertones.

And there we go, my take on the signature Cheryl smokey eye! Now I understand if my above ramblings were hard to follow, so I added in some pictures below showing step-by-step how to complete the look!



I hope you enjoyed this quick little demo and do let me know if you try this out for yourself!
RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION...