When SpaSeekers invited me along to the Westerwood Hotel, Cumbernauld, for a Spa Day, I absolutely jumped at the chance. I think stress is in my nature, and without realising it, I was in desperate need of finding my Zen.

On a bright Sunday (before the rain hammered down) I was dropped off at The Westerwood by Steven and his dad, who used this opportunity to squeeze in a round of golf at the hotel's 18-hole course while I was at the Spa - a win win for us both! I was welcomed by the lovely Elaine, who handed over my towel, plush robe and goody bag filled with an array of miniature ESPA products. I was then given a tour of the spa and leisure facilities before meeting fellow bloggers Eilidh and Lisa for afternoon tea at The Grill restaurant.

I'm all about finger food, and the fayre did not disappoint. After checking our individual dietary requirements (strictly no mayonnaise for Lisa...) we were treated to a lovely selection of miniature sandwiches and cakes. Naturally, having no self control, I sampled ALL of the sandwich options (the coronation chicken was my fave!) and still had some room to squeeze in a few cakes. The scones were definitely my highlight - freshly baked and still warm from the oven - what more could you want?!

After tea, it was time for our treatments. Beforehand, we were given the choice of choosing either two 30 minute spa treatments, or one 60 minute signature spa ritual (these options are available when booking through Spaseekers). I opted for the Fit For Business Back Ritual, carried out by my lovely therapist Linda. The treatment involved a back cleanse, exfoliation and deep massage followed by a purifying back mask and a tension relieving massage to the legs and feet...delightful! Being butt naked (except for some netted pants), in an unfamiliar place with a stranger in the room made ya gal a little nervous, but Linda made me feel so comfortable and at ease the whole time - giving me time to change and get comfortable on the bed in private before coming in to begin my massage. 

Now, I'm theeeee biggest chatterbox, and although this was supposed to be some quiet down time, Linda and I nattered away for the majority of my treatment - she was just so friendly I couldn't help but have a good old gossip with her! About half an hour in, I was so relaxed that I started to drift off - the ambiance of the room, along with the scents and spa music were so peaceful, and it was the perfect opportunity to practice some much needed mindfulness. Before I knew it my treatment was over - Linda left me to slip back in to my swimming costume and robe, before showing me the Rasul Suite (something that came up earlier in our conversation) - a mud therapy suite ideal for couples. 

Afterwards, I met up with Eilidh in the Relaxation Chamber (our treatments were at the same time - 2pm, whereas Lisa's was an hour later) which was the perfect place to chill out and recuperate after our treatments. The room was filled with cosy beds and fun little pods, and we were offered ice water and a selection of complimentary herbal teas. After some chill time, Eilidh and I headed to the pool. We arrived during "children's splash time" meaning the pool was filled with families, so we opted for a poolside photoshoot (#bloggerlife) and dip in the jacuzzi. Back in the changing area, we bumped into Lisa which gave us all a chance to say our goodbyes before we headed off on our separate ways. 

All in all, I had a fantastic day and left feeling relaxed, rejuvenated and, well, ZEN! I had no clue there was a spa so accessible to me - I'd normally go through to Glasgow or Edinburgh for a spa day, but it's amazing that I've now discovered a great place that's less than a 20 minute drive from my house! Now I know if I loose my zen, I know exactly where to go to find it!

Until next time, 
S.B x

My spa time, treatments, afternoon tea and gift bag were complementary, courtesy of SpaSeekers, however all opinions are my own. Swimming pool, relaxation chamber and treatment room photographs were supplied by the Westerwood Hotel.




RELATED POSTS
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZ...