Now, I don't know about you, but whenever I see Coca Cola's Christmas advert my little heart skips a beat, so you can IMAGINE my excitement when I saw it for the first time on TV earlier this week. I know you know what I'm talking about, seeing the big red truck glistening with lights and the build up of the song we all know and love could get even the scroogiest of all Scrooges excited! If you have no clue what I'm talking about, this should give you an idea...


Basically, seeing this on TV means the Christmas countdown IS ON!! And girls, you know what this means...party season is upon us which also means...PARTY DRESS SHOPPING!! I think Christmas dresses are my favourite kind because they generally involve my favourite thing...SPARKLES!! So, if anyone is stuck for inspiration, I thought I'd share a few of my party dress picks of the festive season.

First up, my favourite section of the bunch, the Sparkly Dresses.


This gorgeous green sparkly number is sure to get you in the festive spirit. It's from Motel Rocks and is priced £58


 This gorgeous sparkly skater dress from Topshop priced £65 will be sure to stand out at any Christmas party!



Next up is the timeless The LBD. A classic favourite of every fashionista.


This absolutely GORGEOUS midnight black dress is £52 from ASOS


I ADORE the baroque style embellishment on this dress. A steal at £29.99 from Misguided

 There are no other words to describe this dress apart from "classy and fabulous!"ASOS £25




 Look ravishing in rouge with these beautiful Red Dresses.



This dress is definitely my favourite out of the lot. You can purchase this STUNNING red dress for £48 from ASOS

This cute red skater is a BARGAIN at £20 from BOOHOO




Finally, Oxblood is a key colour this season. This rich wine colour will look fabulous on any skin tone!

The back of this dress is just beautiful and the simplicity of the front makes this an all round gorgeous dress. ASOS £49

Lastly, this long sleeved velvet number will be sure to keep you slightly cosier on a Christmas night out. I reiterate SLIGHTLY! You can get this dress from American Apparel for £39


So there you have it, a selection of gorgeous dresses fit for any party queen!


Until next time,
Stay classy

Suz x
RELATED POSTS
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZ...