Oh hey there...

Firstly, i'd like to apologise for the lack of posts last week, i've been struck down with a terrible cold and was practically bed bound for 4 days...NOT FUN. Anyway I'm feeling a bit better and back with a massive big juicy post for you to feast your peepers on! 

This coming saturday is going to be super exciting as its PHOTOSHOOT DAY!! As part of our coursework at uni, we have to plan and organise every aspect of a fashion shoot to be published in this years Robert Gordon fashion magazine! Exciting huh?! I can't give too much away yet, but somehow I've ended up being my groups model so saturday is going to consist of me frolicking in the sea, posing on the sand, and generally being FREEZING cold on the beach! After having a makeup and hair trial with Maddie yesterday, we came up with sort of an edgy, mermaid-esque look which leads me on to this post as I thought it could double as a last minute halloween tutorial for any of you lovely ladies who haven't thought of an outfit for tomorrow yet! So, without further a do, lets get started!



Prior to this tutorial, I've already applied my foundation, concealer, blusher and filled in my eyebrows. I've also included links to the websites of every product mentioned in this post.

We're going to start by applying a base to the eyelid to prime our eyes before the eye shadow.
I've chosen two of the Maybelline Colour Tattoo 24hr Cream Gel Shadow, in "Turquoise Forever" and  "Eternal Silver",  starting with the silver colour on the inner corner of your eye and the turquoise colour on the outer corner.

Next I'm taking the colour "Virgin" from Urban Decay's Naked Palette and placing it on the inner corner of my eye, on top of that silver base we just applied.
Then, taking the colour "Flipside", also by Urban Decay, I'm applying this to my outer corner.


Next I'm taking the colour "deep truth" by MAC on a small shader brush and drawing a sharp line on the crease of my eye. Im also going to drag this colour out into a slight wing to make the look more dramatic.


Taking a blending brush, I'm running it all over my eye to blend in the colours and get rid of any super harsh lines. Im also running that "deep truth" colour under my eye on the lash line.


Next, line your upper lash line with liquid eyeliner and apply false eyelashes (optional).


Finally for the eyes, apply mascara to blend your false lashes into your natural lashes and apply the "virgin" colour we used at the start to highlight our brow bone. This is also optional but I lined my waterline with Barry M's Shimmering Eye and Lip Crayon in number 4, to make my eyes look bigger and more awake!


Moving on to the lips, I'm lining them with Maybelline's Colour Tattoo 24hr Cream Gel Shadow in "Turquoise Forever" (the base we used on our eyes at the start) and slightly smudging it down towards the centre of my lips. Next, I'm filling in the rest of my lips with  Barry M's Shimmering Eye and Lip Crayon in number 4.


Now for the fun part! Using a foundation brush, I'm applying, again, Maybelline's Colour Tattoo 24hr Cream Gel Shadow, this time in the colour "Eternal Silver", over one side of my face and blending it down onto my cheekbone. Next, taking a square of cross stitch fabric, I picked up at HobbyCraft, I'm securing it with a kirby grip at the top of my head, and using a small square of tape, taping it down onto my neck.


Taking an eyeshadow brush and the two turquoise and blue eyeshadows we used on our eyes earlier, I'm running the brush over the squares, starting with the dark blue colour at my hairline, fading into the turquoise colour onto my cheeks. When you remove the cross stitch fabric, your face should look something like this...


Lastly, taking some self adhesive gems, also from HobbyCraft, I'm randomly sticking them on top of my "scales." If you're having trouble making them stick to your face, you can apply a small dot of eyelash glue to the gem and that will help it stay in place all night.


And thats it for the makeup...MERMAIDALICIOUS!


Since I am ridiculously poor at the moment, I do not have the money to go out and buy a brand new mermaid costume to go with my makeup, SO, being a fashion student, I managed to dig out some clothes that I already own from my wardrobe and turn myself into a DIY mermaid!




My blue shirt is from Forever 21 and both my skirt and my leggings are from H&M.


I hope I've given you who haven't decided on a halloween costume some inspiration for tomorrow, or maybe some inspiration for an upcoming fancy dress party? Either way I hope you've found this post helpful and enjoyable!

HAPPY HALLOWEEN EVERYONE! Have a wonderful day/night tomorrow and stay safe!

Lots of love,
Stay classy

Suz x




RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION...