OH MY GOSH I AM IN LOVE!!! 

I've always been a huge fan of Urban Decay. In fact, I'm almost 100% sure that the first eyeshadow palette I ever owned was their Deluxe Eyeshadow Box! 

Since I am a huge lover of nude and neutral toned eyeshadows, I feel like the Naked palettes were created especially for me! All 3 palettes are excellently pieced together, with the shades that complement each other carefully arranged side by side, which makes life so much easier for the girls that maybe aren't as sure as to which colours to wear together!

Naked 3 is all about the rose gold tones. The palette is a mix of matte, frost and shimmer shades, starting with a gorgeous creamy pink colour ("strange") all the way to the deepest shade in the palette: a black shadow with iridescent red shimmers ("blackheart"). These colours are formulated to suit any skin tone and as they are all still very neutral, they will go with any eye colour.

These shadows are SO PIGMENTED! It's CRAZY!! The swatches above are literally the result of two swipes from my finger! The colours are so easily blendable too, they glide on to the eyelid like silk!  I am so so impressed and I think this may actually be my favourite Naked Palette yet!

As you can see from the pictures above, for todays look, since I had work, I opted to go super natural - keeping it purely matte shades on my eyes. However, you could easily create a full on "i'm going out and want to look shit hot" look from this nifty little palette! I used "Strange" on my lid and brow bone, "Limit" as my transition shade and "Nooner" on my crease. Very subtle but still gives my eyes that extra special something!

I'm not sure what else to say about Naked 3. It's definitely a 10/10 in my opinion and my new go-to palette! I cannot wait to start experimenting with different colour combinations - and i'll be sure to post up pictures of my favourite looks I create.

Has anyone else bought Naked 3 yet? What are your thoughts?


RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
2018 | SUZYBLUE