Soap and Glory, is in my opinion, quite an underrated brand. I've tried out a few of their products over the past few months and have yet to be disappointed. So when it was time to buy a new mascara, I was excited to see that this one was recommended to me by a few of you on twitter. At £10.50, my first thought was that it was a bit pricey for a 10ml mascara, considering their "show good face" foundation/primer is £11 for a 30ml tube. But none the less, I needed a new mascara so bought it anyway!

Soap and Glory boast that their "7-SIDED FAN FLARE-180™ brush with a V-groove" lays down volume & intensity, and a "network of combing & curling surfaces give length, definition and DRAMA" to lashes. Furthermore, "strength-building COLLAGEN PRE-PEPTIDES and LONG-STRETCH POLYMERS wrap lashes in a flexible, lengthening film for NO FLAKE24 all-day wear technology." All sounds very exciting doesn't it? 

With all the hype, I was dying to give this product a try, however, I was left feeling disappointed. The mascara does lengthen and lift my lashes and makes my eyes appear more open...but thats about it! It's staying power is good, I was pleased to notice that the product stays put all day and doesn't flake off but I was really expecting more from such a hyped up product.

I mean, the mascara isn't bad, but it doesn't "wow" me-and I definitely feel it's not worth £10.50. I did notice however, If I curl my lashes before and after applying this product, they do appear significantly longer and lifted.

All in all, this product is OK, but i'm unsure if I will be repurchasing. If I had to rate it, I'd give this mascara a 6/10...maybe I should have just stuck to my beloved Maybelline "The Falsies"

Whats your favourite mascara, can anyone recommend a good one for when mine runs out?

Until next time, 
Stay classy

Suz x
RELATED POSTS
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
♡Review: Rimmel Stay Matte Foundation♡ | SUZYBLUE
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZ...