On Tuesday, I celebrated turning 24. As well as frolicking around Dublin on the lead up to my birthday and drinking ridiculous amounts of gin and prosecco, I took a little time out to think about all the things I've achieved, and all the things I've learned in my 24 years. So without further ado, here's a little life advice from SuzyBlue...
Don't live your life the way others think you should - it's nobody's life but yours, do what YOU want to do with it.
Do not be ashamed of enjoying chips cheese and donner meat while sober (just don't make a habit of eating it regularly - it's disgustingly bad for you!).
Sex is all kinds of better when it's with someone you love.
Exercise regularly. 
Do something that scares you every now and again.
It's OK to not know who you are or what you want to do with your life when you're in your twenties.
There is no greater feeling than being absolutely, ridiculously head over heals in love.
Time heals everything.
DO NOT take advantage of your health.
Social media is not real life. Instagram is not spur of the moment - it's weeks of planning and 20 minutes of editing before anything goes online.
Mints ease nausea, anxiety and digestive troubles (I know you know what I mean...).
Take every opportunity offered to you - even if it's not what you want at the time, you never know where it will lead.
Go on every job interview you are invited to - even if you know you don't want the job, interviews are always something you can learn and grow from.
Don't take yourself or life too seriously.
Do something you enjoy each month - whether that's getting your nails done, a spray tan or having a bottle of wine to yourself in the bath - enjoy your monthly "me time".
Breathing techniques, mindfulness and meditation really help with anxiety disorders.
Family, friends and loved ones are the most important thing - treasure them.
Gin helps soothe all ailments
It's totally OK to occasionally spend the full day in bed.
Drink more water.
Relationships take work - love is a choice, it doesn't just happen.
Be kind to everyone you meet, you have no idea what someone is going through.
Don't be afraid to take risks in life.
Travel as often as you can, learn about other cultures, see the world.
S.B x


RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE