Clarins is usually a brand which I bypass when I'm in the House of Fraser or Debenhams beauty halls. I always thought it was more of a "mums brand", purely because my mum uses a lot of their products. My mum is the worst for buying luxury beauty items and then leaving them to fester untouched in her makeup hamper. Nothing irks me more than witnessing this time and time again, so when I saw this little gleaming white bottle sitting perfectly on top of all the junk in her hamper, I decided to take it upon myself to give it a new home...and i'm SO glad I did (sorry mum!)

Clarins describes this product as "The ultimate pick-me-up for tired, stressed skin" They go on to say that their best-selling radiance booster helps 
"eliminate signs of fatigue in a flash! Instantly moisturises, brightens and tightens facial contours so skin looks rested and relaxed."
The beauty of this product is that it can be used as a primer under your makeup, or as an intense moisturising mask.

This product is my new holy grail-It does exactly what it says on the tin. As soon as I apply it, my skin feels instantly moisturised and any dry patches I may have are eliminated. The glow it gives my skin after I put on my foundation is incredible and just after a week of using this product, my skin without any makeup looked noticeably brighter and healthier.

Furthermore, this product is full of all sorts of exciting ingredients: extracts of olive and witch hazel are said to minimize signs of fatigue and fine lines, and plant extracts smooth and tighten the skin. Lastly, "Bisabolol" (not quite sure what this is) soothes, softens, and helps restore skin's youthful glow...I could ramble on about how amazing this product is for hours!

 When the tube runs out I will definitely be repurchasing it (with my own money this time!) So thanks mum for introducing me to the beauty of Clarins, next time I won't be so quick to judge them as a brand!

Until next time
Stay classy

Suz x

RELATED POSTS
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE