 This week I was lucky enough to be taken to Paris by my boyfriend as a two year anniversary treat. We spent 3 wonderful days shopping, eating and exploring the city and I was so so gutted to have to leave. Paris is one of the most beautiful places I have ever visited and I cannot wait to go back!

Day 1: After arriving in Paris and finally figuring out how to work the metro system, we made our way to our hotel and were greeted with the wonderful news that we were getting a free room upgrade! LOVING LIFE!! After dumping our stuff in our room, we headed out to our first stop - Notre Dame. The cathedral was breathtaking and after having a wander around and taking pictures, we grabbed lunch at a cute little restaurant overlooking the Seine before heading to the Pont de l'Archeveche, more commonly known as the Love Lock Bridge. I couldn't believe the amount of padlocks there were attached to both sides of the bridge, it was amazing! After attaching a padlock of our own and throwing the keys in the Seine, we jumped back on the metro and made our way  to the Champs-Élysées. We stopped half way down to pick up some macaroons from Laudrée before continuing on to the Arc de Triomphe. By the time we got there it was dark, and the views from the top were spectacular. Overlooking Paris all lit up at night is a memory i'll never forget. Our last stop of the day was the Eiffel Tower. Unfortunately, the queue for tickets to get to the top was far too long, and we were too tired to wait in line, but just seeing it sparkle was enough to make us happy.

Day 2: Since Kyle had NEVER been to Disneyland, going there whilst in Paris was a MUST! After getting last minute tickets and jumping on (the wrong!) metro we finally made it to Disney and it was the BEST DAY EVER!! We managed to see both the day and night parades as well as hopping between the two parks and going on all the rides (Peter Pan is still my all time fave!) I legit don't think I have even been happier in my life than on that day! Seeing all of the princesses in the parade made me want to cry with happiness, I was like a kid on Christmas Day the whole time!

Day 3: This was our final day in Paris. In the morning we headed to the Galeries Lafayette and oh boy, it was like a dream! Imagine Harrods in London, but with 100x more class! Galeries Lafayette is basically a massive upmarket department store split into 3 buildings: male, female and home ware. It housed everything from Versace and Celine to Zara and Urban outfitters - crazy right?! After wandering about in awe for around 3 hours, we decided to go and visit the Louvre before having to catch our flight home. Everything about the Louvre was so beautiful. I could have stayed there for hours - it was so peaceful and relaxing with such a calm atmosphere, the total opposite from the other hustle and bustle tourist spots in Paris.

And that's that, it was over in the blink of an eye. I had the best time ever and itching to go back already! One of the best things we found about visiting Paris is that pretty much all of the tourist attractions are free for anyone under 25, and since everything in Paris is SO expensive, it's great to be able to see the sights for free!





RELATED POSTS
My Evening Skincare Routine | SUZYBLUE
2012: A Year In Pictures. | SUZYBLUE
♡FOTD + Mini Tutorial: Kylie Jenner♡ | SUZYBLUE
24 Things I've Learned in 24 Years | SUZYBLUE
I WANT WHAT SHE'S WEARING | CROATIAN INSPIRATION...