When I did the Candida diet last year I had to cut out all sugars, including fruit, for 2 months. It's a very restrictive diet and I found breakfast options particularly limited.



I had always enjoyed cereal and had occasionally had granola too. I wondered if I could find a granola recipe that was free of sugar and sweeteners. The only sweetener I was allowed on the candida diet was Stevia. I googled some recipes but nothing was quite right so I set about experimenting.

The best combination I came up with is this. I no longer follow the Candida diet but I still make this granola regularly as I really do like it and it fits perfectly with my current diet. See my diet ‘rules’ in my post here.

My quantities can be scaled up or down. This makes approximately 8 portions.


Ingredients:

300g mixed nuts
100g mixed seeds
225g oats
60g flaked coconut
3 tbsp. ground cinnamon
3 tsp. stevia
Pinch of salt
8 tbsp. coconut oil (melted)

Method:

Heat your oven to 150 degrees Celsius / 300 degrees Fahrenheit / Gas Mark 2.

Prepare two baking trays. I line mine with greaseproof paper, foil also works.

Weigh the nuts and add them to a large bowl. Any combination of nuts work well. I tend to throw in which ever I have around at the time. For this batch, I used brazil nus, almonds, hazelnuts and pecans. I have also used walnuts and cashews in the past. All work well. You can leave the nuts as they are or break them into smaller pieces, this really is to personal taste. I tend to break up the larger nuts such as the brazils and pecans and leave the smaller ones whole. If you want to bash them all up then use the end of a rolling pin, it’s very therapeutic!



Next you want to add your seeds. Again, any combinations work. In this batch, I used chia, pumpkin and sesame seeds.

Then add in your oats. I use porridge oats as we always have them, they are easy to find and are cheap. When I was on the Candida diet I used oat bran instead and this worked just as well.

Next throw in the coconut. I didn’t have any flaked coconut so in this batch I have substituted it for desiccated coconut. Both work fine, I personally prefer flaked as I love the texture it adds to the Granola.

Add your ground cinnamon. Yes, it says 3 tablespoons. Yes, that sounds a lot. I find it’s the perfect amount, I love the taste of cinnamon, especially when avoided sugar. You can of course add less if you prefer.

Now for your stevia powder. This is about the only ingredient I can’t get for this recipe in Aldi! I use this one that I get from Amazon. Stevia is great as it is fructose free and that’s the bit of sugar we should really be trying to avoid. With stevia, less is more so I add mine to this recipe in teaspoons.



Add a pinch of salt to bring out the flavours and that is all your dry ingredients in your bowl.

Now you want to add your coconut oil. You need to melt it before measuring and adding it. I melt mine in the microwave. I then measure out my 8 tablespoons (I have a 2-tablespoon measuring spoon which makes things quicker.) Add to the dry ingredients and give everything a good mix to ensure an even coating.




Spread the mixture evenly over your two baking trays and then bake for 20 minutes.

Once you remove the tray from the oven place them somewhere to cool down. Let the granola complete cool before transferring it to an airtight container. If it’s warm when you put it into the container it could go soggy instead of crunchy.



Store somewhere dry and it will keep for a few weeks. If you’ve not eaten it all by then!



I serve mine with natural yogurt, great if you’re on the candida diet. Alternatively serve with milk or any other type of yogurt. Feel free to add fruit.

Here I’ve added natural yogurt to my bowl and topped with granola and blueberries.




I hope you will try making this. Enjoy!

Thank you for reading.


Kelly x

Suggested Posts: My Favourite Green Smoothie Recipe
                            My Journey To Healthy Eating 