Hello and welcome to my first blog post!

Who am I, why am I doing this and what can you expect from me?

I’m Kelly, I’m 38, I’m a British mum of two with a degree in maths and I enjoy cooking and reading. Just over a year ago, I was diagnosed with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS). I have suffered with depression since my teenage years and have often struggled with anxiety, especially during the last two years.


I will try to summarise as best I can why I am writing this blog, it’s a very long and complicated story. If you become a regular reader, and I hope you will, you will discover much more about my life and my journey.

I saw a therapist for some time during 2014 and 2015. He concluded that I have a fear of judgement. This had never occurred to me yet it was a light bulb moment and made sense of many of my fears and insecurities.

I straight away began to realise how much of my life was being negatively affected by this fear. I wanted to change that. However, the CFS hit me and put a stop to me making changes. I have instead been concentrating on managing that condition. That has been challenging and I’ve ended up only making minimal progress in each area.

I intend to improve my mental and physical health, improve my diet and start to exercise.
I will also tackle my fear of judgement and explore and enjoy the areas of my life this fear has infringed upon. For example, fashion, make up, socialising and if I’m brave enough other challenges I envy others for taking on like mud runs (scared just typing that one.)

So far, I have made some progress, I’ve dabbled with healthy eating, started to teach myself about make-up and pushed my boundaries a little with fashion (I bought a leopard print jacket!)


I need to do so much more. This is the first day ever I could use the phrase ‘I turn 40 next year’ (cries uncontrollably). The thought scares me and for the first time I realise I can’t keep putting my life on hold due to fear. So, 2017 is the beginning of my journey to be the best version of me.
I want this blog to motivate me and keep me on track. It will be a mixed bag of health, beauty, fashion, lifestyle and all things me. I hope it will entertain and dare to hope it will inspire.

I don’t have a set plan yet for what to post and when. My guess is that I will post twice a week, mainly topic based and then do a general update maybe every 2 or 4 weeks.

Making my journey public also tackles my fear of judgement head on. I have been very torn whether I could bring myself to link my blog on Facebook as I most fear the judgement of those who know me. I have linked it and I’m proud of making that step.

Join me on my journey and by that dreaded birthday in August 2018 you can all help me celebrate!

Read my second post for more on why this scares and excites me and more on why I decided to start a blog.

Suggested Post: Tackling My Anxiety and Fear of Judgement 