I was recently asked to review the MOKURU and as my children have just started a YouTube channel on which they love to review toys I really couldn’t say no!

The MOKURU is a wooden desk toy from Japan that is set to become the latest craze amongst adults and children alike.


Think of it as a fidget type toy. This cleverly designed piece of wood will keep you amused and challenged for hours.

There are many tricks to master. Flip it, spin it, pass it to your friends, the list goes on.

To master it you will need a little patience, a quick eye and fast fingers. Once you’ve got it you will be hooked. It will certainly test your focus!



Both Annie and Freddie have loved playing with the toy and can’t wait to show their friends. They love practicing and get a real buzz when they manage to flip the toy and catch it again, as you will see in their video linked below!

I love toys like this for the kids as they are cheap, small and easy to transport yet provide hours of entertainment. Let’s face it a toy that keeps kids focussed is always a winner and when it sparks Dad’s competitive streak too it’s even better.

I even believe this is the sort of toy that would be good for stress busting too. It would be hard not to be mindful when concentrating on mastering your MOKURU skills and as I am currently learning mindfulness is extremely beneficial for stress. (See my diary posts for more on that.)



The MOKURU is new to the UK and is available now from SMYTHS Toys and Amazon. Just be warned there are lots of fake copies out there of this toy so be sure you get a genuine MOKURU. They are the only one designed and engineered to ensure perfect balance and the material quality is very good. Check out the MOKURU website here and get all the information on where to get your MOKURU on their Facebook page here.


We had great fun making the YouTube video. Neither Annie or Freddie had much practice before I put them in front of the camera with their MOKURU so they are far from perfect however I think that makes the video more relatable and fun. You will also see that they quickly start to get the hang of it. You also see some tricks they created with the toy and also an explanation of some tricks they are hoping to master soon!

As usual they put their humorous spin on things. Freddie especially loves to make people laugh so if he does please comment on the video to let him know, you’ll make his day!


Thank you for reading and don’t forget to watch Annie and Freddie’s video and subscribe to their channel Banana Eyebrow. I will be telling the story of where the name Banana Eyebrow came from in a diary post very soon.


This isn't a sponsored post however I was sent the toy to review.

In summary, I can’t help but give the MOKURU a positive review. As Freddie says this toy gets ten thumbs up not just two! The MOKURU will sure be going into school with them both next week to be showed off to their friends. I suspect teachers across the country will become very familiar with the MOKURU very soon.


Kelly x