Last month my husband Ross and I were invited to attend the Media and VIP launch night of new Leicestershire restaurant Black Iron. 

The contemporary British steakhouse and restaurant is located within the historical Winstanley House which has recently been renovated turning it into a boutique hotel, restaurant and event location.




Situated just outside of Leicester city centre in beautiful parkland this venue has a really special feel to it from the minute you make your way up the grand driveway.

My pictures truly don't do it justice so once you've read my review I would recommend having a browse of their website.



We were sat at a table in the main restaurant, there is also a smaller room to one side and a separate bar area. The restaurant has been perfectly decorated and captures a modern feel whilst retaining the features of the grand house it sits within. 


We ordered a glass of wine each, having been helped by the waitress in our selection. All the staff we had contact with were lovely and knowledgeable. Our waitress showed genuine excitement at being part of the launch and to be working somewhere she found so special.

We then made our food choices from a set menu that was made up of a selection of dishes from the main menu especially for the launch.

For starters we both went for the glazed ginger pork cheeks, toasted sourdough and pickled apple. 



Having never had pork cheek before I was excited to see what it was like. It was genuinely lovely. It was cooked perfectly, was presented beautifully and the flavours complimented each other wonderfully. 

For mains we both made the same choice again, this time the rib-eye steak, dripping fries, bone marrow and house salad. 


This too was a perfectly cooked dish. The steak was tender and each was cooked to our requirements. The chips were lovely and crispy. I also enjoyed the sauce. I rather embarrassingly asked the waitress which bit was the bone marrow (I've never had it and wanted to know!) She answered it was in the gravy but to me that just seemed like peppercorn sauce so I am still not entirely sure. However it was delicious, as you can tell from my completely empty plate.

For desert I went for the Black Iron trifle and Ross went for the Victoria sponge cake with strawberries and Earl grey ice-cream.




Both were delicious. The Earl grey ice-cream really did have a tea like taste and went so well with the cake.

Overall we were both very impressed with the standard of the food on offer at the Black Iron. This is the perfect restaurant for a special occasion.



Winstanley house is also available to hire for events and weddings. It would make a magical wedding venue and I am sure it will be very popular. 

We also were given a tour of the boutique hotel and got to see a couple of the rooms.  As with the rest of the house the renovation has been done perfectly with a very high end finish that captures the modern and original features. 




The bridal suite made me want to get married all over again just so I could get ready for my big day there! 

Again, my pictures do this place no justice so please also see the Winstanley house website here.

Even the toilets are gorgeous so I captured a quick outfit shot. I must feature some more style posts again soon. 



If you're looking for a venue to celebrate a special occasion I can definitely recommend Black Iron and Winstanely house.

We received our meal in exchange for the review, all opinions are my own.

Thank you for reading

Kelly x

Other restaurant reviews you may enjoy:

Bodega

Bistro Pierre