This week I visited Primark and picked up a few items I’m loving. I’ve often visited Primark for bits for the kids but rarely for myself. I was pleasantly surprised when going around the women’s section just how great the clothes are. Then there is the homeware, they are doing great with that. They do make-up and beauty stuff now too, how did I not know this? I could have bought so much! I was very good though and stuck to a few bits. Read on for what I bought and what I wish I had bought!




Some of my readers are new to blogging so let me first explain what a haul is! It’s basically a shopping spree. You’ll find them in blogs and on YouTube and they cover a variety of shops and products. My favourites are clothes hauls and homeware hauls. Mine today is a Primark haul.

So now for the fun bit, what did I buy! I got off to a fantastic start. I needed a pyjama top to match a pair of trousers I already have. I wanted a long sleeve one as I hate to be cold in bed. Whilst browsing a sale rail I found this one for £1. Yes, you read that right, £1. 





Primark is great for stocking up on basics so I got a pair of tights, they are black and have a sweet pattern through them. I also got some footie socks (the ones that remain hidden in your shoes.) They are black and are designed for sport so are breathable. Good for the walks I intend to start going on. The tights were £3 and the socks £3.50 for 5 pairs, bargain.





I then discovered the beauty section. I found some exfoliator gloves and was excited as I’ve wanted to try them for a while but didn’t want to spend too much. These were 4 gloves for just £1. Bit of an aside but when using exfoliator gloves do you wear just one or a pair? I’d have thought one would be sufficient?



Anyway, back to beauty, I also picked up a bottle of face primer spray. I love face sprays and I also thought this would be good for wetting my beauty blender before applying foundation, at only £2 I can justify using that way!


Then it was up to homeware, I could have bought so much. I was very restrained and settled for a throw and a candle. The throw is so lovely and soft and will be perfect thrown over the back of my sofa for when I’m feeling cold as I often do. I know my children will love snuggling under it too. At only £4 it was wonderful value and they do them in an array of different colours.



The candle I have had before and I loved it. They do a variety of scents, this one is vanilla. A personal favourite scent of mine. The last one I had burnt well and completely evenly which for a cheap candle is amazing. So many candles I have that are more expensive ‘tunnel’ and you waste so much of it. So, at only £2 I highly recommend these.



So, those were all my purchases. Now for the stuff I wish I had bought!

First up was a pair of ripped skinny jeans. Sadly, they didn’t have my size available. They were perfect. They were ripped but had a square of material sown in behind each rip so you don’t actually show any skin. I love the ripped jean look but don’t want to have my knees hanging out so this is the perfect solution. I found a picture of them for you. I will be trying to get them soon.



I am bad at spontaneous clothes shopping, BAD. I just can’t do it! I must want it, need it, try it, think about it, check everywhere else for a better one etc etc. The problem with this approach is you often then get shopper’s regret. I have that now about a certain t-shirt I saw and I am praying they will still have it when I go back. It was a band t-shirt, another trend I currently like. The problem with me and this trend is that I feel I should like the band and be familiar with their music, otherwise I feel a fraud! As my music taste is rather, shall we say pop based, that makes finding an acceptably cool band t-shirt rather tricky. Primark have a Bon Jovi one. I love Bon Jovi, I have albums and everything! It was perfect so why didn’t I buy it?! I’m an idiot is why and I’m too damn sensible. Pray for me it’s there when I go back! I couldn’t find a picture of it but hopefully you’ll see me in it!

Thank you for reading. Get yourself to Primark soon.

By the way this isn’t sponsored and I bought everything myself, obviously.


Kelly x

Suggested Posts: Styling a Floral Blouse
                            My Fashion Loves and Fears