Friendships, a tricky subject to write about as many of my friends read my blog. This is a subject I must write about though as it is an area of my life where I often feel inadequate. I’m hoping through this post I will find I’m not alone, as that would be so reassuring. If I can reassure anyone else in the process, then all the better.

I don’t have a great track record with friends, I’ve never intentionally sabotaged a friendship, I’ve never fallen out with someone or decided to not talk to them anymore, it just seems to happen to me. 

I ended up at different schools to my friends at age 11 and then became a victim of popularity contests. In my later teenage years I had great friends but I let insecurities come between us. 

Circumstance meant I ended up with a new set of friends each year at university and as it was difficult planning meet ups with all of the groups I've ended up not meeting up with any of them. It doesn't help of course that we are spread out across the country, in fact the world. I do still see my best friend from Uni, she lives an hour away, for years we didn't make enough effort but recently we decided to try and see each other once a month.

My 30's have been the hardest years yet to make and maintain friendships.

My idea of what constitutes friendship has certainly changed over the years. Is that my age or is it the era we live in?

In my younger years a friend was someone I saw almost daily and my life revolved around them. Now my life revolves around my children and work and housework and it doesn't leave much time for friendship. 
I have two small groups of friends who I meet with once a year and rarely get past small talk with. I only know what’s going on in their lives because of Facebook. If one of them left their partner, had a cancer scare or lost a parent I would only know if they put it on Facebook, is that really friendship or more of an acquaintance? I consider them friends and I’m sure they would say the same about me but do we really make enough effort?

For a while it was a challenge to make new friends as I rarely met new people. Then through my children starting school a whole new potential friendship group opened up. But how? Pick one and try to make plans without looking desperate? Play it cool and hope they decide you're the best friend they have to have? 
Out of 30 mums who do you gravitate to? In my daughters class groups formed amoungst the mum's, they stood in those groups at collection time. I didn't seem to make it into one though. I didn't want to pick a group and alienate anyone so I tried to move around the groups. I became the one who spoke to everyone but wasn't close to anyone. I think about it too much I guess. 

All I ever really wanted is a few or one, one would do, friends who I have things in common with and see regularly. Someone to share a bottle of wine with. Someone to moan with, have fun with, confide in and support. If I decided on Friday this week I wanted a girly night out with cocktails, I wouldn’t have anyone to ask. If I wanted to go clothes shopping with someone I wouldn’t have anyone. No one will already know everything I share in this blog as there is no one I share everything with. That makes me sad and lonely.

Have I been lazy or unlucky? Do I try too hard or am I just generally annoying? It feels like I see great friendships all around me but don’t have one myself. Is that true or do more people feel like me than I realise? It’s certainly hard if you move away from your home town and lose the friendships from your teenage years. I find my thirties particularly challenging friendship wise as we are all so busy and many of my peers already have long standing established friendships.
We like our friends to have things in common with us but I feel no one out there is quite like me! But until recently I’ve kept most of me very well hidden, maybe openness is the secret to lasting friendship? I hope so. 
Facebook can be wonderful, it put me back in touch with my first infant school friend and we now try and meet once a year. I fear though that Facebook can make us feel we have lots of friends and know everything about them, it helps us convince ourselves we are in touch with them regularly but are we really?

We don't talk anymore, I never phone friends. Birthdays have changed too. I used to see my friends on my birthday and theirs and swap cards and presents, I'd have their birthdays on my calendar. Now the norm is to rely on Facebook to remind us of a birthday and therefore it's too late to send cards. It used to be the thought that counted but now we don't need to think. (God I sound old!)

I expect friendships to change again as I reach further decades of my life. I also now have online friends which is of course a whole other type of friendship again.

I hope I haven’t offended anyone by writing this, it’s truly not my intention. Nor is it my intention for people to treat me any differently, far from it. I’m simply sharing, putting it out there to see if anyone else feels the same way. Let me know your experiences.

 Suggested Posts: Why am I Writing a Blog?
                                 Tackling My Anxiety and Fear of Judgement                                          
                               