So here we are, my second blog post. I still can’t quite believe I am a blogger now!


I was so pleased and overwhelmed by how many page views my first post received and by how many supportive messages I received from friends, family and via social media. So many of you enjoyed my post and so many have admired my bravery.


Although part of why I am doing this is to face my fear of judgement I guess it never occurred to me just how brave that was. Sitting behind a screen over the Christmas break, during which I’ve barely seen anyone, made it seem easy enough. Reality is starting to hit now though and it’s rather overwhelming.

Even though I know all my friends and family can access the blog it still feels somewhat anonymous as I haven’t had to talk face to face to anyone about it yet! That will be the really challenging bit, I must fight my embarrassment and face being the centre of attention for a few minutes.

Tomorrow’s school run will be odd, wondering who might have read it. I posted the link to Facebook publicly so friends of friends may possibly have read it too. Whilst unlikely, it’s at least possible that even a stranger I pass in town could have read it and will know my name and know about my life……ok I really didn’t think this through!!



Prime example, on New Year’s Day after publishing my first post we spent the day with my sister in law and her family. They aren’t on Facebook so my plan was to tell them about the blog in person, I couldn’t do it. I didn’t know how to bring it up. Now I’m stuck between wanting to text them about it and worrying they will wonder why I didn’t mention it sooner!

Much as all this scares me I still feel very motivated to continue as I believe it will be good for me. As previously mentioned I want the blog to act as a motivator for the changes I want to make in life. I also want it to be a hobby, a passion, an outlet, a source of fun and hopefully a source of entertainment and inspiration for others.

Over the past year, I have gotten into watching YouTube and reading blogs and that given me the inspiration to do this. Reading through other people’s blogs today though I suddenly felt pressurised as their content is so professional. Will mine be as good? Will I have enough time to post regular content? Will I have enough ideas?

I just must keep reminding myself that this is all new and that I am not a trained writer and that I am a very, very amateur photographer. Improving my photography skills and having a creative outlet are two of my other main reasons for doing this. I adore photos, I still get mine printed and put them in albums in date order (yes really, although I’m about 18 months behind. Like I said I have great intentions but am poorly motivated!)

You’ll have to put up with random old pictures until I sort out taking some new ones though!

So, having a blog scares me, overwhelms me, puts pressure on me, makes me scared to go out in public and is probably a nuts idea. But between you and me, the overriding feelings I get when I think about my blog are pride and excitement. So, screw it, I’m going to do it and see where this journey takes me and if you do see me out, please do talk to me about it! Also, if you have any thoughts on this post please leave me a comment below.

Thank you for reading. Look out for more posts soon.

Suggested Posts: Tackling My Anxiety and Fear of Judgement 
                            My Journey To Healthy Eating