On Easter Monday we drove down to Kent for our annual visit to a Haven caravan park. We've been going each year since Annie was born and have visited sites in Dorset, Norfolk and Lincolnshire. This was our first trip to Kent. 


The Kent Haven is situated in Allhallows on the estuary of the river Thames. The site is smaller than some yet manages to fit in just as many amenities and activities. It's a pretty, clean and well presented site with great views out across the estuary.


Once we checked in and settled into our caravan we made ourselves some dinner. We are always happy to prepare most of our own food and the caravans are always well equipped to do so. 

We have never been disappointed with any of the caravans we have stayed in with Haven and this particular one was the nicest yet. I'm afraid I didn't get any pictures inside (bad blogger!) Trust me it was lovely, modern and comfortable.

After dinner we always head down to the show bar for the children's entertainment. The disco and the character shows are very popular with the younger children. The show bar was also modern and well presented and had a fun feel to it.
After a great nights sleep we decided to spend a day on site trying out some of the activities on offer. I hadn't realised until this trip that you can pre book your activities online! This is useful to remember if you are interested in doing a particular activity especially during high season.

Whilst we waited for our first activity the kids had a play on the adventure playground. Mum may have joined in too! 


We then headed over to the Nature Rockz area to go bug hunting! 
Nature Rockz are a new set of outdoor activities Haven offer this year. Think Bear Grylls for families. Examples of activities on offer include den building, fire starting, survival training and treasure hunts. 

As we went quite near the start of the season the whole range of activities weren't timetabled but ranger Jim who runs Nature Rockz at Allhallows said he would happily try and accommodate any requests guests had and got straight onto it when my children wanted to see him start a fire!

Jim was great, very knowledgeable and really patient with the kids. They found bugs and he also showed them where some burrowing bees were living and where the foxes have dens on the site. 
After a quick lunch back at the caravan it was time for Annie and Freddie to have a go on the aqua gliders at the pool. They had a great time under the close supervision of the instructors who were great at easing any nerves!
We even managed to fit in an archery lesson. The lesson was popular and I would say it was full. It was only suitable for adults and children aged six and over so we had only booked Annie and Ross in. Me and Freddie were keen to watch so went along with them. The lady running the lesson, Maria if my memory serves me, was so good that she let Freddie join in and found him a bow suitable for his age, this was a lovely touch that Freddie appreciated. 
On our second day we drove out and visited Margate and Whitstable, both are within an hours drive and offer a great British seaside day out. 

By the third day we decided to stay on site again. There is so much to keep you occupied that it's a great option. The kids and Ross started the day with a swim. 

We then had a family game of crazy golf. Which caused much laughter and frustration! 


Finally we hired a family pedal cart before heading down on to the beach that runs down the edge of the site. Those pedal bikes are hard work! Again we had lots of fun and laughter as we pedaled around. Luckily for me Annie was desperate to pedal so I got pretty much a free ride!



After checking out on Friday we used the pool again and then we headed to the on site restaurant for some lunch. 

The food on offer is your usual family pub fare and we all emptied our plates. My only criticism of the week sadly stems from the restaurant, we had to wait more than half an hour for our desert which was ridiculous and we had chased it twice before it came.



Overall this was a great break. The staff at Allhallows from the reception to security were all so friendly and helpful.

One evening our heating went off so I rang reception and someone was with us in minutes to fix it. 

On two previous Haven visits I also had to call reception, once when we were missing something from our kitchen equipment and another time when our fire wouldn't light. Both times someone was with us within minutes and the issues rectified.

As you can tell we are big Haven fans and this year we are visiting twice. In July we are going to The Orchards so look back for another review.




Allhallows offer far more activities and facilities than I can list so remember to check out their website here.

Get yourself booked onto some of the Nature Rockz events and make sure you take an obligatory giant deckchair picture!

Please note we paid for this holiday ourselves and this post is not sponsored. Haven did however provide us with an activity pass. 

These are all my own and honest opinions. I want my readers to have confidence in my reviews so will always give an honest account.

Thank you for reading.

Kelly x