This may be a controversial post, stick with me though before you make your judgement. I want to voice the question I have had in my head for a while now, is Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) a mental health issue?


I ask this question for many reasons to be honest. I’m not sure the structure this post will take so I am just going to throw out my thoughts in a random order and see how it goes. I hope it will then raise some conversation amongst my readers, comment below or on any of my social media. If I get enough feedback I will do a follow up post to hopefully get us closer to the answers.

To save me repeating myself, if you haven’t read my CFS story you can find it here.

For a couple of years before my diagnosis I had been visiting my GP about my fatigue. They always suggested, due to my history, that it was a symptom of depression. I was adamant that I knew my body and my symptoms and this was different but I begrudgingly went back onto to anti-depressants as I was offered no other options. My mantra at that time was:

I AM DEPRESSED BECAUSE I AM TIRED.

 I AM NOT TIRED BECAUSE I AM DEPRESSED.

Being tired all the time can be depressing. Coming to terms with a chronic condition can depress you. If you already have a long-standing history of depression, as I do, then a CFS diagnosis can trigger depression.

Depression can cause fatigue. Fatigue can cause depression. I can see why my GP made their assumptions the way they did but my input should have counted more. I think we know our bodies better than anyone and we know which condition is casing which symptoms and at which times.

Depression and CFS are both a part of my life every day. Some days I manage them effectively and some days that is harder. They are separate conditions though. Some symptoms are similar and the conditions certainly aggravate each other but they are separate.



I also have a history of anxiety. I am an over thinker, a worrier, someone who panics easily. I am a very emotional person, or as some might say I am ‘highly strung.’ I always have been.

I often wonder, in fact I am convinced that my CFS is a result of the years of strain I put my body under due to my stress, depression, anxiety, and general over thinking. This is of course just my opinion. I do however come across other people who suffer with CFS who also have a history of mental illnesses such as those I suffer with.

So, is our CFS a result of our mental illness and if so does that make CFS a mental health issue?

I feel certain not all cases of CFS are the result of mental health. Many people get it for several reasons I am sure. I imagine most cases are the result of some sort of intense or prolonged strain or stress on the body, whether that stems from mental illness or something physical.

Our mental and physical health are so closely linked. I don’t think we all understand just how much. It seems widely agreed that good gut health and exercise can both be beneficial to our mental health.

We also realise that something purely mental or emotional can cause a physical reaction. For example, feeling nervous can make you shake and feel ‘butterflies.’ Feeling embarrassed can cause you to go red. Feeling upset can cause tears. Feeling something is funny causes laughter. All physical symptoms to a mental condition.



I’m sure my CFS is made worse when I am stressed, anxious or depressed. My body is reacting physically to those mental conditions.

They are genuine physical symptoms as real as tears and laughter and as impossible to control but they are a result of the mental trigger.

Now don’t get me wrong, the mental triggers are also almost impossible to control. It just interests me the relationship between the two.

Sadly, I also realise that CFS is about so much more than mental health. Over exertion physically can also cause me to crash.

I don’t think, even if it were possible, that solving my mental health issues would cure my CFS. I do believe they caused it though.

Even GP’s treat CFS as a mental health issue. The two treatments they can offer are anti-depressants and Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT). The same two treatments offered to depression sufferers.



I was eventually also referred to a rheumatologist, although even he didn’t seem to know why, he didn’t know much about CFS. He was more interested in my elbows, apparently, I have hyper-mobility in them, who knew?!

He said the only CFS expert in Leicestershire had retired so I could only be referred on to a physio.

It’s terrible that a whole county has no expert in such a widespread condition, but that’s a separate point all together.

The symptoms of CFS are physical and they are physically debilitating. Physical exertion will cause a flare up of the condition in sufferers. So yes, it is very much a physical condition and needs to be researched and treated as such.

However, I strongly believe that mental exertion will also cause a flare up and this too needs to be considered.

I also believe long term mental health sufferers could be more susceptible to contracting CFS and I think this too must be researched.

So, what do you think? Is CFS a mental health issue? Please comment and discuss this point.

Thank you for reading.

(Complete aside – apologies for the repetition with the photos, we haven’t got out to take any new ones in a while.)


Kelly x

Suggested Posts: 

Depression, Blogging and Channelling my Inner Wonder Woman
10 Tips For Managing Chronic Fatigue Syndrome