So why did I create a fruit free green breakfast smoothie? When I did the Candida diet last year I had to cut out all sugars, including fruit, for 2 months. It's a very restrictive diet, especially during the first 7 days when you can only eat non-starchy vegetables and eggs. I liked to save the eggs for lunchtime so I struggled with what to eat for breakfast. 



I had always enjoyed smoothies but whilst I happily added vegetables to them I always put fruit in too. I googled some recipes but nothing was quite right so I set about experimenting.


The best combination I came up with is this. I no longer follow the Candida diet but I still make this smoothie as I really do like it and I adore knowing I've gotten the day off to such a good start. 



The ingredients are:

1/2 an avocado
1/2 a cucumber
Handful of spinach
The leaves from 3 sprigs of fresh mint
The juice of one lemon 
1 of water (250ml)

Simply cut the cucumber into chunks and blend all the ingredients together. 

I use my Nutribullet. I love it and couldn't be without it now. However, I used to make this with a hand blender and that works fine too, Any blender will work. The benefit of the Nutribullet is just how completely smooth it makes it. 





To squeeze the lemon, I use this amazing gadget. It's actually a lime squeezer but works for small lemons too. It came free with a bottle of rum and I love it. I drink hot water with lemon every morning so this beauty gets used daily. It squeezes every drop out and no seeds get through, easy to use, my hands are pretty weak and I have no problem.

Add caption






I really should buy the version designed for lemons! Here is a link to one from Lakeland, this looks great as it fits lemons and limes. 

Please note that you can substitute the lemon juice for lime juice in the recipe and I often do.

The lemon or lime and the mint are what make this smoothie taste good. If you miss one of them out, you'll know instantly. 

I grow mint in a pot in the garden. Well I did until it recently died! I will be trying again in spring. In the meantime, I buy cut mint from Aldi. I love Aldi!



If you want to make the smoothie more filling and even more nutritious you can add a tablespoon of chia seeds or desiccated coconut. (Make sure the coconut has not been sweetened) Aldi do chia seeds and Lidl do the coconut. I'm a believer in healthy eating being affordable and these shops are so great at making that a reality.

As the recipe uses half an avocado and half a cucumber I always make a second smoothie and keep it in the fridge for the next day. It keeps well, just shake before drinking.

If you've never had a smoothie with vegetables in it, you may want to try one with a mix of veg and fruit first then progress to this.

I still drink fruit ones too.

Did you like this type of post? I have many other idea for future food posts. Including child friendly recipes.


By the way, this post isn't sponsored by Nutribullet, Lakeland, Aldi or Lidl!! I'm way too small a blogger to be sent items to review or to be sponsored for a post. If that ever happens I'll be so excited, you'll know about it!!



I'm still sticking to my pledge that every photo on my blog will be taken by or feature me. See why here.


Thank you for reading, hope you try and make this fruit free green breakfast smoothie. Let me know if you do!

Kelly x

Suggested posts: My Journey To Healthy Eating
                             Why am I Writing a Blog

Follow me on Instagram, Twitter or Bloglovin. 
Like my Facebook page