I really enjoy creating outfit of the day type fashion posts on my blog so I thought I would do another today on styling a floral blouse for spring. I hope you enjoy it.

I'm dreaming of spring, optimistic maybe but it's definitely getting darker later now so that's a sign we on our way there, right?


I love spring, especially the flowers and the blossom. I can't wait to be able to take my blog pictures in a spring setting.

For now, I'm pretending so I went out withstood the cold and took some pictures to show you how I intend to wear my floral blouse this spring.




As you can see I styled it with my dark denim flares which you will have seen in my last outfit post here. I then added my red boots, I'm obsessed with them right now, see them in my first outfit post here.



I thought I would wear my hair down for this one for a change too, much as I love my signature bun right now.

When the cold got too much to stand I also added my navy coat. Sorry you've seen this before too, again I'm obsessed with it. I bought it on a whim which is very unusual for me. I was convinced I didn't need it, little did I know how much I would end up wearing it! (Note to self, buy on a whim more regularly) 



I got the jacket in the New Look sale for £25!! I adore a bargain. As soon as I tried it on I loved it. It's one of those pieces that goes with so much and instantly makes you feel more on trend and pulled together. 



Before Christmas I bought another New Look jacket, also on offer for £25, that was my leopard print one, see it featured here. New Look is now my go to shop for jackets. I also love their shoes.





So back to my floral blouse. It's by Marks and Spencer and is part of their limited collection. I love it for spring. It feels so feminine and pretty. I adore the sleeve detail. I also enjoy changing it up by tying or untying the ribbons that hang from the neckline.  









You could smarten it up with a pencil skirt or keep it casual with jeans. I've also styled it with skinny jeans and converse type trainers. I wore it like that for a day in London and it felt perfect.

With my new-found confidence growing and my love of fashion now well and truly embraced expect more posts like this.













I've added heaps of pictures as I love to see lots when I read outfit posts on blogs. Being in front of the camera is facing many of my fears head on too. Just need to work on my face expressions now. Don't forget to laugh at the out takes below!

I hope you find them fun and maybe inspiring.

I love you if you read them as it gives me the perfect excuse to go shopping!

So that is one way I will be styling my floral blouse this spring. How will you style yours?


Kelly x

Suggested Posts: Tackling My Anxiety and Fear of Judgement
                              Why Is It So Hard To Make Friends
                               Outtakes