I have wanted to share my Mexican burger recipe with you all for a while now and so when 2tech got in touch with me and asked if I would like to review their latest product launch, the hackit, I knew it would make perfect sense to combine the two.

For the past year, I have been cutting down my intake of processed foods so I wanted to create a healthy homemade burger recipe, these also happen to be gluten free burgers.

All the recipes I found were ok but I generally tend to find homemade burgers a little bland. On my quest to cut out processed food I had also created a fajita spice mix so I thought, why not combine the two and so this recipe was born!

Mexican Burgers

Ingredients

·         500g Beef Mince (I find 12% fat works best)
·         1 red onion (finely chopped or grated)
·         1 egg
·         1 – 1 ½ tbspn Fajita Mix (recipe here)

Method
Mix all the ingredients together. Form into 4 burgers (if you're being a perfectionist you can weigh them!) and wrap each in Clingfilm. Place in the fridge for half an hour. Cook on a griddle pan or frying pan for about 7 – 8 minutes per side depending how well done you want them to be.




You can freeze the raw burgers and defrost and cook when needed.

I served mine with home-made guacamole, salad and sweet potato fries.

The Hackit

The hackit has just come to the UK and is available from 2tech Ltd. It’s a kitchen tool that is designed and manufactured in Norway. It has become Norway’s best-selling single kitchen tool, having sold over 1 million pieces in a country with a population of just 5 million.

Its primary design is to break up mince whilst cooking. It can also be used to mash, chop and break up a variety of foods such as biscuits, avocados, berries, bananas, potatoes etc. Alternatively use it to stir sauces or soups.

I used it to mix together the raw mince and other ingredients for my burgers. Also, to mash up the avocado to serve with the burgers. It really helped, was easy to use and is comfortable to hold. I think the hackit looks cool too!




When making bolognaise this week I also used the hackit to break up the mince. 


I have also mashed potatoes with it (the pictures weren’t easy as the steam from the potatoes kept steaming up the lens!) The potatoes passed my daughters taste test so that’s a complimentary review right there.




I’m sure I will be reaching for my hackit whilst cooking more and more.

My personal favourite use for it was making the guacamole.


Giveaway
2tech Ltd have also been kindly put forward three more hackit’s for a giveaway for you my lovely readers!

To enter you simply need to like and comment on my Facebook post here .

Giveaway Terms and Conditions: This is open to UK residents only. The competition will be open until 30th April 2017. After that time, I will pick three winners at random and contact them to arrange delivery. You will have 28 days to respond after which time I will pick an alternative winner. This promotion is in no way sponsored, endorsed or administered by, or associated with Facebook.

This post is not sponsored however 2Tech Ltd did provide me with my Hackits. All opinions are my own.

Thank you for reading.


Kelly x

Suggested Posts: Two Spice Mix Recipes
                            Coconut and Cinnamon Granola Recipe
                            Green Smoothie Recipe