When I posted my first catch up post a week and a half ago I said I would update you on some areas in more detail. I've done diet and now it is the turn of my physical health. Namely my chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS/ME).

I started this blog back in January to log my journey to improve my physical and mental health, face my fears and generally become a better version of me.


In terms of facing my fears I did rather well during the first half of this year and you may remember a post I wrote on those achievements, if not you can find that here. If you haven't read that post please take a few minutes to do so as you will get a real insight into me, why I set up this blog and the journey I am on.

So how am I doing with my physical health? It’s tempting to say not good (I am a natural born pessimist!) That wouldn’t be fair though as I have made progress this year. 

As I said it’s too easy to say I haven’t achieved progress but that is because firstly I am not yet where I want to be and secondly because the progress is so slow it’s hard to notice it. Yet when I make myself think back to how I was a year ago I realise I have made huge progress.

I was still working then, just 22 hours a week, but it felt like 100. I worked, collected the kids from school and that was about it. I would often go to bed at 6.30 and sleep till the following day. I had head fog pretty much daily and constant aches and pains, especially in my legs.

I have now had a year off work, firstly as sick leave and now as redundancy. I have managed to get a lot of rest during that year and physically that has certainly helped me. I can now stay up till 8.30 or even 9 most nights. I can do housework or go out for a short walk or do some shopping or meet a friend and generally be fine so long as I get some rest too. The pains are now mostly only aches and are not constant and I only get head fog if I have over done it.


Sometimes I think I must be completely recovered now so will have a busy weekend with a later night to test myself and sadly it does catch up with me, but a couple of days rest gets me back on track and I can plan for that.

So, I am not cured but I am managing the condition well.

Of course, if you read my catch-up post (here) you will know I have had a lot of stress to contend with the past two years and so whilst the physical rest has been there the mental rest hasn’t. Now the stress is done with (manically touches wood) I hope I can get the mental rest I need and that may be the final piece in the puzzle of recovery.

If recovery is even possible. Some people call it a remission, I guess they mean they are back to fully functioning normally but are also aware they could get another flare at any time. We shall see. Whatever happens at least I know I have found a way to better manage this and I feel blessed to be better off than so many other CFS sufferers. 

(Touches wood again.)

I started the year with a whole list of challenges to tackle, I wanted to do it all in twelve months. As we are now already into November it's unlikely I will but you know what, that is ok. So long as I am always making progress who cares how long it takes. This isn't a journey with a set destination, it's my life and I just need to keep finding the motivation to better it, little by little.

Thank you for reading.


Kelly x