A couple of weeks ago my husband Ross and I were invited to the new menu launch event at Bodega in Leicester. Having been to the restaurant before we knew we had to attend. We both love Mexican food so Bodega is right up our street. 



We were welcomed by restaurant manager Justin and marketing manager Vicky who are both lovely and so passionate about Bodgea. When they welcomed us with cocktails I couldn't have been happier! The first cocktail on offer was a blueberry and elder-flower margarita. It was seriously so good, I will definitely be going back for one of these, ideally during happy hour which runs from 4 pm until 7 pm and 10 pm until close.  



There are now four Bodegas, as well as the Leicester one there is a Birmingham restaurant, one in Worcester and their newest edition in Derby. It still retains the feel of a private restaurant as opposed to a big chain. I love the decor, my son would love the wrestling figures!

Bodega specialise in Mexican street food, they really are different and a refreshing change from many of the restaurants in the city.



We were brought food to share with the other bloggers at the event. This type of food is really perfect to share and it's great to get several dishes that you can all dip in to. 

The first dish on offer were the nachos. I adore nachos and have tried them in many pubs and restaurants and I can honestly say these were some of the best I have had. Bodega make their own nachos and they are so much better than the shop bought version (you actually can't even compare.)


Next we got to try the vegetarian tacos and a tinto sangria. I love a good sangria and this one went perfectly with the food.

The tacos were very tasty. They were filled with black beans, roasted vegetables, sweetcorn kernels and confit tomatoes. A great combination that both me and Ross enjoyed, you wouldn't miss meat at all whilst eating these. 



I love that at blogger events I'm not the only one taking pictures of my food!


We also had the plantain salad which consisted of, avocado, plantain, cherry tomatoes, lettuce and pomegranate seeds with a lime & chilli dressing. I had never tried plantain and was pleasantly surprised, it may look like a banana but tastes more like a potato!


The pork tacos were my favourite dish, after the nachos. They marinate the pork in Dr Pepper! I would have never expected that but trust me it really works so well!! I would normally always be a chicken girl and this has converted me. 


Finally we had burritos. Both pork and vegetarian. I was so full by this point but managed to finish a vegetable one as it was good. The burritos are ore of a meal as they also contain rice and beans and come with salsa, guacamole and sour cream.


If you are a tequila fan then Bodega is for you. They have a whole tequila menu. The star of which is the big brother of Tequila, the Mezcal. There is a whole page of the cocktail menu dedicated to Mezcal. We got to try two of them. We were warned Mezcal is very much a 'marmite' as in you love or hate it. I would say across the party we were fairly evenly split in our love and dislike. Sadly I was in the dislike camp. Those who loved it were going back two days later for more of the gin and tonic version so I would recommend you giving them a go if you get the chance.


Overall I loved the event and Justin and Vicky looked after us very well. The food was of great quality, fresh and tasted amazing. I will definitely be going back.

They also do a children's menu and it is very much a family friendly restaurant.


The only hiccup during the evening was when the fire alarm went off. Bless them, Justin and Vicky looked so stressed and kept apologising. The restaurant was busy and in addition to that they had two tables full of bloggers they wanted to impress! 

I hope they understand I had to mention this happening as my blog often refers to my own fear of judgement. I therefore totally understood their panic. It also made me realise how unnecessary it was. None of us minded at all. These things happen and what matters is how you handle it and frankly they did great! We all had a good laugh about it!

It's testament to what a great place this is that even with the alarm ringing out people were still reading the menu outside and coming in to eat.




I think it is clear just how much I enjoy this restaurant. If you find yourself in Birmingham, Derby, Leicester or Worcester then try Bodega. 

We were provided with all the food and drinks during the evening however this post is not sponsored and all opinions are my own.

Thank you for reading.

Kelly x

Suggested Posts:  
MEXICAN BEEF BURGER RECIPE USING THE HACKIT 
BISTROT PIERRE REVIEW 
TACKLING MY ANXIETY AND FEAR OF JUDGEMENT