When I was recently offered the opportunity to review the latest Hatchimal CollEGGtible toy I couldn’t refuse. My children, Annie 8 and Freddie 5, adore any toy that comes in an egg or is a mystery so this range is right up their street.

The latest edition to the range is a 48-piece puzzle and matching character which of course comes inside an egg. This is our review and we have also made a YouTube unboxing and first impression video, see below.


There are two characters and corresponding puzzles available and the mystery is that you don’t know which you will get until you open the egg, hence the mystery.


Both Annie and Freddie love the fact you get to crack open the egg just like a real one. You basically rub the little heart on the front until it changes colour and then the egg will be soft enough to crack. We got the purple character, a cute little four-legged animal with silver wings.


The toy is recommended for children aged five plus. Both of mine had fun with it however the puzzle at just 48 pieces wasn’t very challenging for Annie who is 8 and was better suited to Freddie who is 5.

The puzzle is brightly coloured and has good sized pieces that are sturdy and clip together easily. Annie and Freddie completed it on the carpet and that was fine.

They both enjoyed having a figure that matched the puzzle. The figures are also exclusive to the puzzles so a must for any keen collectors.


The puzzles aren’t yet available however I will update this post with links once they are. I believe the RRP is going to be £6.

The individual Hatchimal eggs are so popular and so making them into a puzzle is a great idea. It would make a great present as you get the fun of getting a mystery figure in an egg that you can crack open plus the fun and more educational challenge of completing the puzzle.



My children have always enjoyed completing puzzles, I think children take such a pride in achieving the goal. They will often complete the same puzzle over and over which also means they become great for working their memory. Puzzles also aid their fine motor skills and problem-solving abilities. Plus let’s face it, they are fun!

For some time now my children have been huge fans of YouTube. They love nothing more than watching other children unbox toys, complete challenges etc.

They have nagged me for ages to let them have a go themselves and whilst I initially had my reservations (those who regularly read my blog will know I haven’t even shown pictures of their faces until now) this seemed like the perfect opportunity to let them have a go.


So, if you would like to see them unboxing their Hatchimal CollEGGtibles Mystery Puzzle and hear their first impressions please watch. Also, please subscribe to their channel and recommend their video to any children in your lives as it would make them so very happy.


This is not a sponsored post however I was sent the toy to review.

Thank you for reading.

Kelly x