Last week me, Annie and Freddie were invited to a family blogger party at Bobble Art in the Intu Centre Derby.

When I realised Bobble Art is a stationary and accessory shop I knew I had to accept the invitation or the kids would never forgive me!




Sadly, we were a little late due to a car accident however the staff welcomed us right in, looked after us and made us feel we hadn’t missed anything at all.

Around the shop art stations had been set up to keep the children amused. There was a variety of activities to choose from and between them suited all ages.

The shop is so photogenic that I went a bit mad with my camera! I hope the pictures will give you a good feel of the shop, the party and the items they stock.












Annie made a beeline towards the super clay table. I must admit I had never heard of super clay before. Bobble Art sell various sets of it. It is a bit like play dough except it dries out once your creation is complete so that you can keep it. Each set comes with all you need to make a certain item or you could have fun making up your own. There are also instructions should you wish to get the clay back to its original form and start again, now that is super!






Freddie started off with by making a stencil drawing. He chose a picture of a knight. Once he had used the stencil to complete his image he then got to colour it in.






Freddie then had a quick go of hook a duck, this is another set you can buy in store. Before joining Annie at the super clay station, yes, she was still there, she really did love it. They both made ladybirds.





It was then time for them both to choose temporary tattoos to have applied. An easy decision, without even seeing what was on offer Freddie wanted a monkey and Annie a unicorn or guinea pig. Luckily all three were available! These too are available in store and I highly recommend them, they applied with no fuss and a week later are still going strong. They would be great to use at any kid’s party.



Both children then got given a goodie bag. Annie got a lovely big pink bag which she was thrilled with. This too can be bought in store. The quality is lovely and there was a good selection of styles available.



Freddie was given a pirate wallet, an activity book and a super clay set. All were fun and very appreciated. He is already using the wallet and has made the super clay model. The activity book has been started and will take ages to finish, it’s huge! Again, all can be bought in store.

Annie was so impressed with the store she even spent some of her own money on a colouring set.

The instore experience is great. The store is bright and well laid out. You can easily locate gifts suitable to a specific age range.

The staff are friendly, knowledgeable and genuinely lovely with children.

If you are looking to have a child’s birthday party in Derby I would definitely recommend Bobble Art.

If you can’t make it to the store and want to get your hands on their items then check out the Bobble Art website here.

After the party, we spent a few hours at the Intu Centre. It’s great for families and offers an arcade, bowling, adventure golf, a kid’s club, summer holiday activities and many children friendly dining options.

We chose the food hall area as it meant Annie and Freddie could have a Burger King whilst I got something more suited to me and of course we could all then sit together.

We had a play in playmobile zone and signed Freddie up to the Intu Derby Kid’s Club.

We even managed a game of adventure golf.







The golf is well laid out, has fun décor and is great for all ages. My only reservations were that being a busy day you felt rushed as people would always be waiting behind you at each hole. Also, some of the special effects were noisy and Freddie wasn’t the only child in there to be upset by that. The one that got him was smoke nosily blowing out of a statue's mouth.

We finished off our trip with a visit to Krispy Kreme Dougnuts, had to be done! Even they have a colouring and game station for their young guests. Intu really are so family friendly.



All in all, we had an enjoyable day and will be revisiting the centre for sure. You can find their website here.

Annie and Freddie would love you to watch their video all about their Bobble Art fun.



If you love toy and family reviews also be sure to check out my Hatchimal review here and Mokuru review here.

This post was not sponsored, Annie and Freddie were given goodie bags to take home, all opinions are honest and my own.

Many thanks for reading.

Kelly x