Originally I posted this on social media, but no one but I felt really self-conscious about it and took it down. But I wanted to share it here.

My New Year's tradition has always been to reflect on what I've learned in the past year, so I thought I'd share a little...

Even though it hasn't always been good to be alive this year, I'm thankful I'm still alive, and I'm even more thankful to my family and a few faithful friends who have kept me going.

With the death of old dreams comes new life and new discoveries about oneself. It's been more painful than words could ever describe to face countless dead ends, have my life sidetracked off the road I had planned for myself, and have people leave my life because of it, but it has forced me to really take a look at what I value and what I want for my life.

It's easy to get caught up in following a trajectory set for you or just trying to get things done day to day; It's been eye-opening to take a break from that pressure and try things I'd given up on ever being able to do, like art and sewing, and realize I'd written myself into a corner by just assuming I wasn't good at certain things or I had to follow a certain path in life. I wonder how much we could all learn, grow, and experience in 2016 if we all wandered off the beaten path a little and tried new things and dreamed a little more.

Life is full of ups and downs that force your internal GPS to recalculate your route; those changes can be invariably frustrating, but it's always fascinating to see how we are constantly evolving as individuals because of the things we see and do along the way.

Whatever hurts have scarred you in past years, I hope you can start a new year with the knowledge that even if no one else understands what you've been through or even if your struggle doesn't seem valid to yourself, you have still triumphed each day you have lived, and there's nothing wrong with giving yourself credit for even the smallest battles victories.

There is hope as long as there is life. ‪#welcometomidnight 