One thing I really do miss about school is that we, being banned from alcohol and such shenanigans, had dances at least every other month. I never went to school dances in middle and high school, so I was surprised to find just how much I loved dancing whilst attending college functions.

I had the chance to go to a show of a favorite band of mine, Family Force 5, and dance my tiny little heart out. Good for burning off all the pent-up anxiety chemicals from withdrawal and an emotional conversation with a close friend. And good for self-confidence.

The highlight of my year from hell (last school year) was probably a Saturday night when a dance was being held for Freshman in the courtyard outside my room. The music reverberated through our whole building, giving me the idea that I should get up on the bed and dance along with the apathetic crowd outside.

I had a grand old time even though my roommate rolled her eyes and refused to join in, hard core judging me like I was a 54 year-old dad jamming out at a J. Biebs concert. To my delight, some people actually noticed me and started waving and imitating my moves. Some people noticed me and judged, but some people were really enjoying dancing with me from a distance and it was a really fun experience. I guess it was nice to connect with complete strangers, especially considering how most of my attempts to form connections or make a name for myself at that damn school had been chewed up and spit out and trampled on.

But it all ended in a split second when one straight-laced guy waved at me and then signaled for me to stop. The spell was broken and I immediately bounced off the bed and slunk to a corner to call my mom and cry, thoroughly chastised for goodness-knows-what.

Why can't we just encourage each other to let loose and have fun? It was a joy to see people at the concert when I watched the audience for the opening acts and see people who were obviously huge fans and sang along to every word like they were alone in their car. Music and dance are meant for joy, connection, and happiness. They bring together strangers and remind us of our common experience; remind us we're not alone.

It's sad that so many are too self-conscious or too worried about being deemed immodest or an embarrassment or crazy to do something as harmless and uplifting as letting your body move to beautiful music.