It's been a while since I posted on here and a lot has happened. My pain significantly increased from December 2013, particularly with some quite severe bladder episodes in January 2014 (imagine a UTI that can't be cured by antibiotics). I ended up seeing a new gyne (Dr Susan Evans) and I have an excisional laparoscopy booked with her in less than two and a half weeks. She recommended that I try taking low-dose amitriptyline (Endep) to treat neuropathic pain. It has been fantastic and I cannot recommend it enough. It does make getting out of bed in the morning slightly harder but I have to say that it is a lot easier to get to sleep at night when I don't have to constantly get up to go to the bathroom!

For the surgery I have to stop taking all anti-inflammatories two weeks before. I'm a little scared about this as my period is due day one of not being allowed to use anti-inflammatories. We'll see how it goes. Getting a massage the night before to try and help the muscle aspect. I will also be stopping taking krill oil, amitriptyline and agomelatine (Valdoxan) in the same time span. It'll be interesting to be on no drugs whatsoever for the first time in a long time, particularly having a period on no drugs. It'll be interesting to see just how bad it is without the painkillers (although I will be able to take paracetamol). I reckon it will convince me once and for all that I'm making the right decision about another surgery.

I've also been going to see a pelvic floor physiotherapist (Dr Maureen Bailey) to deal with pelvic floor spasm (the result of many years of pain causing my pelvic floor muscles to be constantly tight). This has also significantly improved my back pain and urinary problems. Last week she loosened some of my back muscles and I walked out of her office feeling like I was on a cloud. I never knew how much pain I had in my lower back until she fixed it!

I wish I'd gone to Dr Evans sooner after the last gyne told me that I just had to deal with it. Who knew that there were some really simple solutions out there that greatly improve my quality of life. I'm glad I've got Dr Evans on my team :).

In other good news, the Canberra Endometriosis Network has totally taken off! We currently have 81 members (!!!!!), a dedicated Yoga for Endometriosis session weekly and have met up three times.
You might also like:
Shireen's Story
Updated Endometriosis Journey
Day 14: Tips for visiting the doctor
Heather's story
Pain scales: what it's like to have endometriosis
Linkwithin