I learned that there isn't really all that much to know when handling old documents. Mostly common sense type stuff. You should always wash you hands, as the oil and bacteria on your hands can damage paper and attract more dirt where there is oil residue, store the papers in a stable environment, only store in acid free folders and/or boxes... Apparently it's also important not to store newspapers with other papers, since newspapers have a high acid content which damages other paper.

Another piece of history my grandmother sent home was an old box camera. I mentioned it to my father, and he was curious, so we both fiddled with it (it's supposed to open but it's jammed shut!), and I did a bit of research online. It's a Kodak no. 2 cartridge hawk-eye model c, made between 1926 and 1934. Sadly, from what I could find it's extremely common and sells for between $5 and $15. Still pretty cool though. All our camera investigation caused my dad to get out his old Nikon (from the 70's) which still works perfectly. He explained how it worked (I know about apertures and shutter speeds and that already, just not how to adjust them on that camera), and it's a really nice camera... It gives you way more control than your average modern point-and-shoot model.


My cool old Kodak camera... They've come a long way, haven't they?


I also spent a LOT of the day reading Native American legends. I quite like the book The Telling of the World. Except for introductions, which I almost never read, I've been reading straight through. I love the fact that most stories portray animals and humans as completely equal, something virtually never found in western myth's. I also learned that unlike our western culture (especially in the time of the settlers), natives were not afraid to talk about sex (some of the stories were quite amusing!). Anyway, I'm greatly enjoying all the stories, which are taken from a variety of North American tribes. I'm off to read a bit more of that before bed now!

Listening to today: NOTHING. *Gasp*

Reading: The Telling of the World
You might also like:
Old newspapers and magazines
Overview of the Northeast Unschooling Conference 2009!
Grown Unschooler Anna J. Cook: "The experience of ...
Grown Unschooler Jaclyn Dolamore: "Art and stories are ...
Linkwithin