I feel bad that I haven't been blogging lately. And even more than feeling bad, I miss it! I miss pouring out whatever happens to be on my mind, figuring it out and coming to new understandings as my fingers dance across the keyboard. But I've found it difficult lately. Someone whom I'm close to has been ill, and the last several weeks have been hard.

The last couple of days I was at the hospital visiting. I hate hospitals. Like really, truly, hate them. Yes, in our current system, with the way things work, we need them, and they most certainly save lives. But that doesn't mean I have to like the close walls, painted dull, lifeless colors, or the over heated rooms, or the smell of sickness and disinfectant. I hate hospitals. But since I think it's extremely important that when in hospital people have those who care about them there as often as possible, I've been putting in a fair amount of visiting hours. So if you've been wondering why I haven't been posting as often, that's one of the reasons. The other is that I've been spending a lot of time talking on the phone, so somehow I feel like I've been using up all of my words for the day... Which is entirely mental, and shouldn't affect my ability to blog. I'm going to try and work on that...

An unschooling friend from Boston is visiting in less than a week, which is really cool! But also rather stressful, because the house is messy, and I was supposed to clean it. Especially my room, which cannot currently fit anyone extra... Now here's something interesting to talk about. My friend who is visiting is male, something that a surprisingly large amount of parents would have a problem with! Even knowing that we're "just friends" (I've lately had a problem with that term, since it seems being "just" friends, as opposed to being in a relationship, is deemed somehow lesser, which I totally do not agree with), most parents wouldn't be comfortable with it. Yet my parents would let me, or my sister (just pointing out this isn't based on age), invite pretty much anyone we wanted, regardless of gender or our relationship with them. I just love my parents...

Other news? I started a 365 day self portrait project, along with my general 365 day photo project. Yes, I know I'm crazy. And I forgot to take any pictures yesterday, what with coming home late from the hospital, and feeling absolutely exhausted. Ah well.

Oh, and one other thing... My sister and I are both writers, although my sister writes daily, mostly role playing, but also writing poetry, short stories, and occasional attempts at longer works, and I just blog, write poetry in sporadic bursts, and occasionally write a short story... But anyway, we decided, since we both love talking about books so much, and want to pay closer attention to the actual writing craft (or at least that's how I feel), that we should both read the same book, write reviews (maybe we could have a sisters book review blog? We'll see...) on it, then discuss it with each other, and basically tear it appart. What was handled well, and what wasn't? Were the characters fully realized, or two dimensional? How was the dialogue? Was there a good hook at the beginning? Was the ending well done? Since it was late at night when we thought of this, but I still wanted to do a bit of book comparing/tearing appart, we read the opening paragraph to several books, and decided whether or not we liked it. I discovered that Emi is a lot more analytical than me. Not that I didn't already know that...

I will try and write more. I really will. I miss my blog! Also, I want to thank all my readers. Twenty-eight followers. Wow. When I first started my blog, the only people who read it were my mom and sister. Now there are twenty-eight people officially following my blog, and I know of other people who read it, and simply don't officially follow it. That makes me extremely happy, and I want to thank everyone who reads my blog, whether it's regularly or occasionally, because you really make me feel like expressing my opinions, thoughts, and random feelings is a worthwhile endeavor. Thank you. Also, the fact that people read my blog makes me feel bad when I neglect it (which is a good thing! If I feel bad, I'll write more. :-P). So I'm going to start writing more again. Or at least I'm going to try really hard to do so!

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
How I Learned to Write (It Involved a Lot of Reading!)
Insecurities and an Anniversary: Three Years Blogging ...
Trips and Ukuleles and Anarchists, Oh My!
This Year in Life... Including Dogs, Trips, Zines and ...
Linkwithin