Some people may have noticed that I changed/updated/sort-of-made-a-new page (it used to be "speaking at..." and never got any hits) last week.  It's entitled speaking schedule and information on booking.

Up until recently, my approach to public speaking tended to be more along the lines of "oh, yeah, I guess I probably will, if someone asks", so this new page is signifying a change in perspective.  I've been doing a lot of thinking lately about the things I like doing, and how I could do them differently, as part of a last-ditch attempt to figure out ways to earn some money doing the things I actually enjoy doing, before surrendering completely to the idea of hunting for a real job.  Some of this rethinking will not involve money, but money has been on my mind, as I've been thinking of how it relates to what I'm doing and want to do, which is something I never really did seriously before (I always seemed to have the mostly subconscious idea that the only way to really earn money was through far less fun ways, so those are always what I thought of when it came to money-earning).

TUC 2010. Definitely a case of "what? Um, yeah, I guess!"

And, well, in that thinking and rethinking of things, I decided to make it clear that not only will I do public speaking, but I actively want to be doing more public speaking gigs.  I enjoy it quite a bit, and though stress is often involved, it's a challenge that I genuinely like.

So here's what I have to say on my new public speaking page:

If you would like me to speak at your event or to your group, please contact me at unschooledwriter@gmail.com.  If it's something local (Montreal and surrounding area), I'm happy to do Q & A's, panels, and/or short speeches for only the cost of transportation (bus fare, basically), simply because I think it's important that people learn about unschooling!  However, especially for longer speeches though for the above as well, I prefer to speak on a by-attendee-donation basis, thus helping to support me and my ability to write, travel, and speak, while still being accessible to everyone who's interested in hearing what I have to say, regardless of income level.  Receiving a flat fee also works, of course!  I'm very open to discussing and trying hard to make things work for everyone involved.
 
I'm also quite happy to travel further afield to speak, with similar views on cost (paid transportation, beyond that it's negotiable).  Contact me!


I don't know if this will change anything in terms of frequency of public speaking (I'm currently discussing speaking in Quebec City sometime next month, though I started talking to the organizer in that case before making any changes on the blog), but I felt it was important to at least put it out there to see if anything comes of it.


Comments, questions, advice, suggestions, are, as always, welcome in either the comments or by email!
You might also like:
Idzie is Speaking at the Rethinking Everything ...
Unexceptionally Exceptional: The Meaning of Success
Blame Unschooling!
Talks and Magazines
Linkwithin