My mother brought home a very interesting magazine today. On finding Veg News at the health food store, she was sure I would enjoy it! And I have. I've been a vegetarian for nine years and counting, having decided I would no longer eat meat at age six (except for hot dogs and chicken nuggets), and having been completely vegetarian since age eight. With magazine in hand, I sat outside in the sunlight reading about animal cruelty, health problems associated with the consumption of meat, and most worrying of all the environmental impact of the meat and dairy industry. The animal-agriculture industry puts out more green house gas emissions than ALL of the cars, trucks, trains and airplanes in the ENTIRE world. That's a ridiculous price to pay for a burger. All was not so heavy reading, however. I also enjoyed the section on vegetarian musicians, listing people from many obscure bands, but also quite a few more well known ones (Death Cab For Cutie, Black Sabbath, Fall Out Boy). I now have lots of cool sounding bands to look up. Yay! Along with just reading Veg Times, I also had an extensive conversation with my mom on the environment and how we can help to protect it, the deplorable animal cruelty that is a regular part of our mass production food system, activism, and how people who are activists or concerned with one of these problems, are usually also concerned with helping society as a whole. Being strong proponents of social freedom and global responsibility as well as working for animal rights etc. I'm going to try very hard to lead a responsible life in every way, and not to add any more nasty stuff to our world if I can possibly avoid it. The more I learn, the more I'm convinced that everyone must change their lifestyles considerably if we wish to survive as a species. On that note, I decided recently that I want to get involved in some form of activism, to try and help change things for the better.

After reading for a while, I happened to step into the backyard, just to find that things had gotten beautifully wild since I last explored it! Here are a few pictures I took that show just how much of a jungle it is back there...




The jungle between my shed and house.







I have no clue what this plant is, but it sure did grow tall!




A field of mint...





Our gorgeous grape vine.








The plants are taking over the compost bin!



After photography and supper, I walked down to the dock with some local friends, hung around at one of their houses for a bit, then headed home. I think I'll make tomorrow more interesting...

Listening to today: I Kissed A Girl by Katy Perry, Land Of Confusion cover by Disturbed

Reading: Veg Times August 2008 issue
You might also like:
RISE AGAINST
Music, lovely music
Vegetarianism
Earth Day
Linkwithin