Today it's snowing. I was watching it snow earlier today, the small flakes drifting slowly down, in no apparent rush to reach the ground. Later, the wind picked up, and so did the speed of the flakes, swirling around in miniature flurries, seeming to create momentary ghosts that quickly scatter into thousands of individual shards...

I find it hard to believe, having grown up here, that some people in other parts of the world have never seen snow! Never walked on a frozen lake, or built snow forts... I know it's true, but Winter and snow have always been such a big part of my life that I'd truly miss them. Now here's another thing I don't understand; so called "snowbirds" who leave for warmer parts at the first whisper of snow. I would NEVER want to do that! I'll admit that by the time February rolls around I'm sick to death of brushing snow off the car every single time we want to go somewhere, sick of shoveling, sick of frostbit cheeks and wet pant legs simply from taking a walk. But still, all that is most definitely worth it for the beauty of a fresh, untouched snowfall. And catching snowflakes on your tongue. For the way that snowflakes glitter under a streetlight, and the way your voice is muffled by the blanket of snow. For having a huge snowball fight, then stumbling, still laughing, into the house to warm up by the wood stove, nursing a cup of hot chocolate... In case you hadn't noticed, I'm in a poetic mood, and loving the beautiful snow. I said I hadn't posted pictures for to long, so I'm now going to remedy that.

As the days grow colder...


...I experiment with black and white photography... Doesn't my blog look more interesting that way?

I experiment with sepia tone.

I eat peanut butter fudge.

We become pensive.

I watch the snow.

We pull out our fuzzy sweaters.

We happily move inside to escape from the cold outside.

We go to Emi's pipes and drums school Christmas party.

I continue to make lots of yummy stirfry's.

I read about paganism.

I continue to find cool names.

And the cats put in even more snuggle time.


May you all have beautiful cold weather days.

Peace,
Idzie