I love writing on this blog, but sometimes, I just don't have much to say.  And there are so, so many wonderful people out there with terrific stories, opinions, and ideas to share.  So why not have my very first guest post?  I find that idea pretty exciting!

So are you interested?  Here are a few things you should know:
What to write about?  Something that you think will be relevant and interesting to the readers of this blog, and very importantly, something that's relevant and interesting to YOU!
Anyone, regardless of age, political opinions, educational choices, etc. is free to submit something, I just ask that you keep the subjects things that will fit with this blog (unschooling, sustainable living, spirituality, lots of different things, just as long as it's not something that would seem out-of-place on this blog!  Email me with questions: open.eyed.slave@gmail.com)
This is open to you whether or not you have your own blog.
If I get more than one entry, I'll choose the one I think would work best for this blog.  I also reserve the right to turn down any posts that I just don't think would work well.  I may do basic editing on the chosen post, but if I change anything more major than fixing spelling mistakes or adding a comma or two, I'll send it to you first for approval before posting.
It must be a post that has not previously been published anywhere online.
Send all inquiries and posts to open.eyed.slave@gmail.com!
EDIT: Keep in mind that if there are multiple people interested in writing guest posts, any post/idea for a post that doesn't end up as the guest post, can be included in the next issue of the DIY Life Zine instead (I'm looking for lots of stuff for that. :-))!!  Or, it can be saved as a future guest post, if you'd prefer...
Wow, that seems like a lot of guidelines for a simple guest post, but I'm just trying to answer as many questions as I can before they come up!

This most likely won't be a regular thing, because I feel that if it was, it would be cutting into the submissions I get for the DIY Life zine, and I don't want to do that.  But I definitely like the idea of having the occasional guest post, as long as it works out this time...

So, what do you have to say? :-)

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Guest Post: Unschooling Everything
Guest Post: Answering Negative Questions Doesn't Need to be a Priority
Guest Post: Eat & Be Free
Guest Post: The Future of Unschooling by Jeff Landale
Linkwithin