Wow, long time no post (compared to what I usually do, anyway)!  And I don't even have a good excuse! ;-) But anyway, I did not decide to write a post about the fact I haven't been writing posts, so I will move on...

My family is not Christian.  Not even close, really!  I'm animistic and generally spiritual without being *religious* at all, my dad comes from a Catholic background but isn't exactly a believer, my mom is spiritual and doesn't really like to label herself, and Emi refers to herself as a "superstitious agnostic".  Quite a bunch, aren't we?  However, like many North Americans, we celebrate Christmas each year.  Both sides of the family are Christian to a greater or lesser extant, so I suppose it's logical that we do.  And I love Christmas, I really do.  The glorious music (even the religious music.  I just love Christmas music!), the Christmas tree glowing softly in a darkened room, great feasts, glittering decorations, and yes, Christmas presents.  I can't imagine, and wouldn't want to, stop celebrating Christmas!  However, I don't feel a special significance in WHAT Christmas is celebrating.  I could honestly care less about the birth of the baby Jesus.  So for the past couple of years, I've wanted to celebrate the Solstice.  Marking and taking joy in the natural cycles of the Earth.  Now that makes more sense to me. So, although I know few people who live nearby who would appreciate such a celebration (and when I say "few" I mean one, other than my immediate family, unless someone else I've overlooked pops into my head), and actually take it seriously, I'm still going to have a small celebration myself.  I will drag my family along for the ride, make some lovely decorations out of natural materials dragged out of our local woods, cook some tasty food, light some beeswax candles (I've been moving away from petroleum based ones), and just have a good time.  So that is my plan for the Holidays! :-)


In zine news, I now have all the stuff I need!  Woo hoo!  I want to send out a big thanks to everyone who sent stuff in. :-) I now have the slightly intimidating task of putting it all together in an actual *zine*, instead of just a pile of papers.  I say slightly intimidating because there has been A LOT of interest.  I find it slightly unnerving that there are many people enthusiastically waiting to read it... :-S Also, I've been putting thought into what style I want it to be.  It could be more *magazine-y*, with columns and a more professional look, or more traditional *zine-y*, with scissors and glue and different fonts and handwritten bits, and I've decided after very little thought to go with the latter.  The unique, artistic, free-form style of zines is what drew me to them in the first place, so I don't think going for an overly *shiny* look is the best idea! :-P

Oh, and I just have to mention that I can't believe it's December already!  Time passes too fast!  I need to be thinking about buying gifts, and helping to clean the house, and all those other holiday preparatory things...

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Christmas '09
First ever issue of DIY Life Zine NOW AVAILABLE!!
Christmas celebrations
DIY Life Zine now has it's own website!
Linkwithin