For two day in a row (last Tuesday and Wednesday), I went for really long walks. Yay! Both days my sister and I started out with my mother, and she turned back early as we continued with a friend or two. But really, it's best to let the pictures I took the first day tell the story... Sorry, the order is totally screwed up. We (my mother sister and I) started out walking around the streets, then my sister, Borris, and I continued into the woods and destroyed strip... The pictures, however, are a total mish-mash :-S


Endless line of dried sludge as far as the eye can see. Literally. I believe we've walked straight along here for about 25 minutes, and we still can't see the end of it.



I like the lines here...


My sister and I's shadows...




It's a smiley face... Can you see it?


The trees caught the sunset




Apparently you're not supposed to stand under these... Huh, who knew?


It looks like an aerial view of another world


Hmm... Way overexposed, but I wanted to show the extant of the damage




Some greenery has grown up along the devastated strip, but most of it is still dried sludge


I love the beautiful Fall leaves


A farm road wanders off to the side...


Shining strands of power lines...


Having fun :-)








Isn't this fire hydrant just amazingly adorable for some reason?


Where the green things end...





And as for the upcoming festivities, the first one is pretty much here! Tonight, my immediate family (minus my dad who's sadly away on a business trip :-( ) is celebrating Thanksgiving. We're cooking an almost entirely organic, harvest themed meal, with homemade bread, roasted carrots, potatoes and onions, meatloaf for the meat eaters, and I believe soup as well.

As for the other upcoming festivities, well, that's something I'm really looking forward to. :-) Since Halloween is so disgustingly commercialized, and I feel like I'm a bit too old for trick-or-treating, I decided to celebrate Samhain, a Pagan holiday celebrating the final harvest, and also remembering the dead. Some historians also believe that Samhain was the Celtic newyears. So, with the help of my sister and at least one friend, we're going to put together a small celebration. It will be cool. :-)

Peace
Idzie