I can hardly believe it's been six years since I first started this blog. To say it, and I, have changed a lot during that time is an understatement. This blog has taken my life in a direction I never expected, and lead to some really awesome opportunities and connections. Thanks to this blog I have:
Made so many friends/met so many great people
Spoken at conferences scattered across North America
Had my work published in several magazines
Greatly improved my writing and communication and public speaking skills
Made a name for myself, as it were, and built up an online resume of sorts
Felt like I'm actually doing meaningful work
Gotten free books
Received so many lovely, humbling, sweet, and confidence boosting messages
Plus too many more things to list. A huge thanks to every reader, new and old, who has given me their time and their words over the years! I'm incredibly grateful.

A couple of things about the blog

I wrote the first post on the blog on July 6th, 2008, when I was just 17 (which seems hard for me to believe now)
I wrote the first post specifically about unschooling (as opposed to just mentioning unschooling in a post) in January, 2009
Top ten most popular posts of all time on the blog
Unschooling: Are We Teaching Ourselves? (October 14th, 2011)
Sudbury: The Unschooling Schools, a Guest Post by Bruce L. Smith (August 6th, 2011)
Unschooling is Not Relaxed Homeschooling (December 9th, 2010)
Unschooling Grows Up: A Collection of Interviews (regularly updated)
Critiquing the Radical Unschooling Critique: Real Negatives or Gross Generalizations? (May 25th, 2012)
How I Learned to Read and Write (February 19th, 2010)
In Praise of The Unexceptional: Because Unschooling Doesn't Have to Be Impressive (May 6th, 2014)
Teenage Rebellion: An Unschooling, Respectfully Parented Perspective (June 9th, 2011)
Unschooling Isn't New. Really, It Isn't. (June 16th, 2014)
Unschooling Isn't More Risky, It's Just Less Conventional (April 2nd, 2014)

And now, a zine. Two copies of a zine, actually.


I'm doing my first ever giveaway! I'm giving away two separate copies of the the Unschooling 101 Zine (as in, you have two chances to win), to anyone anywhere in the world (you don't have to be from North America!). To enter, you just have to leave a comment on this post saying why you'd like a copy, and be willing to provide me with a valid mailing address. The giveaway is only open for 24 hours (the entire day of the anniversary), so enter now before it's too late!

Good luck, and thanks for reading!