Wow, it seems strange that Christmas is over already!  So much preparation and excitement and stress, then the whole damn thing is over in a flash.

Before going into anything else, I should mention that we had a very cute and fluffy guest staying with us over the holidays.  A friend of my moms was getting a puppy for Christmas (in case you were wondering, I'm not going to go into all the warning bells the whole *puppy for Christmas* thing rings in my head) , but needed someone to look after him on Christmas eve, and deliver him on Christmas day.  I was very happy to volunteer!!  He's a seven week old Labradoodle (Labrador Poodle cross), and let me tell you, this dog is sooooooo fricken' cute!  He's sweet, friendly, intelligent, cuddly, mischievous, and a whole butt-load of trouble.  No, I did not get attached to him AT ALL! *Shifty eyes* But seriously, having your head attacked and your ear chewed on first thing in the morning by an enthusiastic puppy, thrilled by the fact you've just woken up, is an experience that I think everyone should have! ;-) So, for your viewing pleasure, I give you a sampling of pictures (I took a bunch) of our adorable visitor.



 
 
 
 
 
 

See??  I said he's adorable!!  But moving on.

On Christmas Eve, we spent time with my father's side of the family.  I didn't take many pictures, I'm afraid...  My dad did take this one, however: a mostly complete, if rather blurry, group picture. ;-)



I love how virtually no one is actually looking at the camera!  The evening passed very fast, and I was quite happy to get a couple of lovely photography books, a huge vegan cookbook called the Veganomicon, and the Chumbawamba CD I've been wanting (I'm also quite happy to say that after hearing a few songs, Emi gave it her seal of approval, which means I can play it without having to get into an argument abut playing it first!  Yay!! ;-P).

Christmas day, we woke up quite late, and procceeded, after many delays and much stumbling slowly around, to open our stockings and the rest of our gifts.


 
 
 

Then it was time to deliver the puppy (we called him Little Guy since he didn't have a name yet), and head to my grandmother's (on my moms side of the family) for Christmas dinner.  In some ways, I was very sad to see Little Guy go.  We bonded the most out of my family, he slept on my bed, slept in my lap, played with me, and chewed on my ear.  But in other ways, I wasn't so sad.  No more constantly following him around and prying inedible things out of his mouth; no more keeping him away from Winston, who did NOT like him; no more remembering to bring him outside every hour so he wouldn't pee on the floor; no more struggling to get his needle-sharp teeth out of my favourite knit sweater...  You get the idea. ;-)

At my grandma's house, we had a lovely meal, then I took a few pictures.



 
 

I especially enjoyed taking pictures of the blooming tea we made:





...And now here I am today: tired, draggy, and with a small heap of presents.

In case you were wondering what happened to the zine, well, days ago an intelligent person on Twitter suggested I just wait until after Christmas.  No, I protested, it's nearly done, I can do it!  However, I discovered that that close to Christmas, I had to choose between working on the zine and spending time with friends and family, and, well, the latter won.  So I'm left instead with a new self-imposed deadline: to get the zine out before the new year.  I'm kind of upset I didn't get it out when I'd originally planned to, but, well, life happens!

I hope that everyone had a simply fantastic holiday!!

Peace,
Idzie