For those of you who have been reading this blog regularly (if there is anyone who reads this blog... If there is, hi!), or who know me in person, you'll most likely have realized I'm obsessed with anarchy. It makes a lot of sense to me, and since I've been searching for a long time for a political view I can actually agree with and follow, I'm really happy to have finally found one! So here are yet more sites I've found to be quite interesting...

www.indymedia.org an indeoendant anarchist news source
www.infoshop.org an online anarchist community that provides news, opinions, and information
www.akpress.org one of the largest anarchist publishers, I found the book Everywhere All The Time: A New Deschooling reader to look quite interesting, especially since the contributers include well known unschoolers Grace Llewellyn (author of The Teenage Liberation Handbook, which I love!) and John Taylor Gatto
www.crimethinc.com (previously mentioned in my blog) which has some general information, but mostly interesting publications, zines, a few books, anarchist stickers, and other cool stuff
www.greenisthenewred.com/blog written by an award winning journalist (Will Potter) about the US labelling of all green activists and anarchists as "eco-terrorists", debunks myths, and has interesting stories on the latest protests, property destruction, laws etc. to do with green activism
In the USA protesters of the Republican convention are now being tried, for doing nothing more than protesting and expressing their political opinion, under a new terrorism bill in Minosota. The charges are trumped up, and the police have very sketchy "evidence". You can see more about that and similar story at the blog mentioned above (Green Is The New Red), at the news section of infoshop, or at http://coldsnaplegal.wordpress.com/ which is a local (to where the demonstrators were arrested) association of lawyers, or http://www.nlg.org/ which is a national association of lawyers.

So, enough on anarchy for now. I've decided to add at least one photo each post, even if it's an old one, so here is today's:


That's all for now. Peace out, people! :-P
You might also like:
Unschooling and Anarchy
Green Anarchy
Trips and Ukuleles and Anarchists, Oh My!
Unschooling and freedom debate
Linkwithin