Wow. I feel like I haven't blogged in forever! It's less than a week since I last posted, but considering how often I had been posting, it feels like a while...

So, the reason I stopped blogging was that I got a cold on Sunday. And suddenly, everything just seemed like too much effort! I'm still sick and feeling all clogged up, and REALLY hoping this cold will pass before we leave for the Unschooling Winter Water Park gathering on Sunday... I'm getting worried!

I know I was supposed to post a 'week in the life of an unschooler' thing, but I failed at that, since I completely forgot to keep track of what I've been doing! So I'll have to do that some other time...

Yesterday, my mom and I made sushi. And I absolutely love sushi! So I figured I'd chronicle the sushi making in photographs, then post them here!

Sushi rice, which is especially sticky so the roll stays together

This time we used cucumber, jalapeno and spinach seasoned tofu, raw spinach, avocado, and carrots. Only the cuke and tofu are pictured, though.


Nori (seaweed) with the rice spread on it.

The lovely filled rolls.

Lots and lots of delicious vegetarian sushi. Eaten with wasabi paste, soy sauce, and pickled ginger, this is one of my favorite meals!


In other news, I'm reading comics. Which I do not normally do. However, I absolutely LOVE Neil Gaiman's Sandman series. The only reason I even picked it up was that my father had brought home The Absolute Sandman vol 2 from the library, and the large size, weird cover art, and embossed, textured cover that reminded of a bible, drew me in. Of course, all references to religion end there! Or, not really... The stories are extremely eclectic, drawing from world mythology, legends, and biblical stories, and are often extremely interesting. The books often read quite a bit like a collection of separate short stories, although as you continue, the common veins that connect all of the individual story lines become apparent. I love how the only constant character in each individual little tale is Dream of the Endless, the Endless being six siblings who can be more closely compared to the horsemen of the apocalypse than anything else. Dream is such an amazingly cool character. According to Emi, I have a fangirl crush on him, but that is completely untrue. *Shifty eyes* Annnnyway, I'm now nearly done volume 3, and it's really good, although definitely aimed at an adult/mature audience. If reading about/seeing horror, gore, nudity, sex, or stuff like that makes you uncomfortable, then this is not the series for you. That said, it's still a great series!


Oh, and I made a new post on my much neglected trash blog as well.

I'll make sure to post before I leave on Sunday!

Peace,
Idzie