Thank you for your suggestions to my previous post! I think I'll do 'a week in the life of an unschooler' type thing, following both Michele and Signe's suggestions (well, not the suggestion to talk about Signe, but the unschooling one ;-) ). But for now, I wanted to share this exert, which I very much like. I've written in the past about how misguided I find the whole "Green Living" thing (you can check out my past posts on it here and here), and since this excert says so simply why I dislike the whole "Green" thing, I figured I'd post it too.

"The whole individualist what-you-can-do-to-save-the-earth guilt trip is a myth. We, as individuals, are not creating the crises, and we can't solve them. Take our crazy energy consumption. For the past 15 years the story has been the same every year: individual consumption--residential, by private car, and so on--is never more than about a quarter of all consumption; the vast majority is commercial, industrial, corporate, by agribusiness and government. So, even if we all took up cycling and wood stoves it would have a negligible impact on energy use,global warming and atmospheric pollution. I mean, sure, go ahead and live a responsible environmental life; recycle, compost, ride a push-bike; but do it because it is the right, moral thing to do--not because it's going to save the planet.
If we really want to understand why this happened we have to ask ourselves another question: "Why is it that we seem willing to live with the threat of apocalypse rather than trying to seriously alter a world where consumption, of anything, is seen as unrelieved virtue, production, of anything, is regarded as a social and economic necessity, and more, of anything (like children or cars or chemicals or PhDs or golf courses or recycling centers), is unquestiononly accepted?""

That is by Kirkpatrick Sale. Oops I just made another political post, didn't I? Oh well. So now I shall try and keep track of what I do this week as an unschooler... Just so you know, it'll probably be boring. :-P Most of the the "learning" I do involves thinking, reading, and discussing, which although very fascinating to me, is not so much fun to read about! Oh, and here's a couple of quotes that I've found recently, and loved. They've also been added to my quotes page.

"None are so hopelessly enslaved as those who falsely believe they are free." Goethe
"The hardest battle in life is to be nobody but yourself in a world which is doing it's best, night and day, to make you like everybody else." E. E. Cummings

I love quotes. :-)

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Green Anarchy
Earth Day
Anti-civ and environmental quotes
New quote and anarchy
Linkwithin