You remember Emi, right?  I've even shared some of her writing on here!  And I've long lamented the fact she doesn't keep her own blog.  Well, now she does!!  It's called...  *Drumroll*

The Creations Of A Scribbling Face

And this is what the description on that blog says:

Hello and welcome to my writing blog, or, as it's officially known, The Creations of a Scribbling Face! I am said scribbling face, and I'll be using this blog as place to post some of my poetry and prose, as well as my ideas, inspirations, epiphanies, dilemmas, and general musings on creative writing.
I love receiving feedback, whether it be encouraging praise or bluntly honest critique, so if you have something to say please go ahead and say it! I really appreciate every comment. (Don't worry, I appreciate every silent visitor too ^_^).
And now, on to the scribbles! :) 

I HIGHLY recommend you check it out!!  It's just started, so there isn't much to read yet, but just follow along, and I'm sure it'll soon be a wonderful place to hang out...


In other exciting news (to me, anyway, since I'm such a blogging nerd) Blogger has FINALLY added the option to add "Pages" to a blog!!  Woo hoo!  I've been waiting for this for a very long time.  You'll now notice that at the top of my blog, there are multiple pages.  More will be added soon, as well, and in the coming days, all the varied and very messy, hard to find, info located on the sidebar of this blog will be slowing disappearing, and moving into the far more organized and pretty pages at the top of this blog!

The Links and Resources page is proving to be quite a project, and I'd LOVE some help with it.  Please feel free to share your favorite websites, posts, and articles on unschooling with me, so I can add them to the page.  I'm hoping to put together quite a collection of helpfull stuff!

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Pasta and Emi's new blog
Introducing Emi
Growing Up Unschooled...With Siblings
Insecurities and an Anniversary: Three Years Blogging ...
Linkwithin