Okay, for those of you who are curious how things turned out, debate wise, I'm posting this. For those who aren't, don't worry, this is the last post on the debate!

Earlier posts pertaining to this discussion, from newest to oldest, can be found:
Here
Here
And here

I'll now link to the other response videos that I did not post before, and simply told you to check out Hunter's channel if you were interested. I'm linking to them now, instead of just posting the video's here, since I commented on them directly. I didn't address every point, since I found things were taking too much time, but I responded to the points I felt strongest about.

Response part 2

Response part 3

He then both sent me a message, and made a final response video:



The message he sent me (he reads in in the video, but I'll post it anyway):

I finally got around to reading this whole thing and I've reached a conclusion.

I will NEVER agree with you and I will NEVER sympathize with you. You believe in the structure of a society which I know in my very nature as being integral to the survival of the human race. Which I believe has elevated our level of conscious. Structure of one sort or another is in my opinion integral, I need to know more I need to do more and with society as a catalyst I do not believe that can occur.

Don't bother arguing with that, I was just stating my opinion as you stated yours.

So in our views of life and society I believe we are polar opposites, however I will say I believe we can find common ground under several fronts.

We both respect the nature of the individual and believe that there are many forms of learning and teaching as well as many differing ways of living life.

We both believe the world is one without absolutes the is no RIGHT and there is no WRONG, there is only grey.

We are both humans and we are both sharing in an experience we like to call life, while we may disagree to no end we are still human and as fellow members of a race I respect you.

Thank you so much for sharing your opinion with me and allowing me to, not understand (I don't think I ever will) your side of the argument, but to gain a level of respect toward the dedication and level of belief you harbor for it.

Sincerely, Your Fellow Human Being

Hunter.

The considerably less eloquent message that I sent in response:

Yeah, I hesitated before deciding to comment on your videos at all, but I have a hard time reading/seeing things I disagree with and NOT stating my opinion on the matter! I finally only picked the points that I felt strongest about, and addressed those.

I agree entirely that we will never agree. Just as you *know* in your being that this structure is "right", I *know* in my very being that this structure is the worst thing that could happen to our species and all life on earth, and is fundamentally "wrong" in every way. I don't really see room for agreement there on either side! Although, of course, we have found a bit of common ground on a few points, which I think is a good thing. :-)

I agree that there are many ways of learning.

Certainly. The world thinks too much in black and white... I've certainly been guilty of doing so, as I'm sure you have been as well, on occasion, but I try to remember that there are many shades of grey, and that even if something seems completely ethically wrong to me, by another person's ethics it probably isn't.

I do respect you. We managed to have a civil debate on something that we both feel very passionately about, which I think is quite an accomplishment! And even though, yes, I will never agree with your opinions, I think I understand them, at least to a certain extant. Thank you, as well, for sharing in this discussion!

Peace,
Idzie

I hope you found this whole exchange worth following!

Peace,
Idzie