I talk a lot about finding community.  I think community is so very important, both to each individual, and to the overall well being of the world (keeping people separated, if only in their minds, is a good way of making sure they never get together to change things, in my opinion.).

But I think when I say I need community, what I picture is "community" suddenly appearing, fully formed, out of nowhere.

And now that I've realized this is the image in my mind, I also realize that's a bit unrealistic (just a bit.).  I'm bemoaning the fact that something pretty much impossible isn't happening, and letting that negatively affect my life, and my happiness.  And now that I can see that, I find that I'm already finding community.

Every single time I talk to the nice woman selling vegetables at the farmers market, or arrange to meet a new person (or randomly meet a new person), or attend a talk at the local health food coop, I'm building community.  Community isn't something you find ready made, straight off the rack.  It's something that you find, bit by bit, in smiles and tentative first conversations and in being brave enough to just GET OUT!  Out of the house, out in new places, out of your comfort zone (it doesn't have to be far.  Just sticking my toe out of my comfort zone feels good.  Edging past the invisible lines I've drawn.  Not enough to terrify me, but enough to feel pride in overcoming the small rush of fear.).

I've been feeling so optimistic lately, taking such joy in the Spring.  I feel like I'm moving in the right direction, if slowly, and that things will work out.  They'll be okay.  I hope those feelings are right!

Peace,
Idzie

P.S. There's a new poll on the sidebar, open for a bit over a week only, so vote now!
You might also like:
Finding Community
Finding Community @ The Unschooler Experiment
Against the Current: Talk from the Toronto Unschooling Conference
In Praise of The Unexceptional: Because Unschooling Doesn't Have to Be Impressive
Linkwithin