I thought it was worth mentioning that this is the 50th post published on this blog. Yay! When I started it at the beginning of the Summer, I wanted to write here every single day. Well, that idea got scrapped pretty fast, but I have managed to write regularly! To be honest, I don't think I've ever managed to keep a blog (or a personal journal) going for this long. That makes me happy. :-)

So, in other more interesting news, Halloween was awesome! I didn't end up celebrating Samhain, because with the people I was with, and the mood they were in, it simply would not have worked. What we did do (we being eight or nine of us, all locals) was walk around trick-or-treating (well, most of us trick-or-treated. Myself and one and a half others didn't trick-or-treat, feeling we were too old), hang out at a pick-nick bench cheerfully making fun of each other (don't worry, no one ever gets offended or we wouldn't do it), then chill in one friends garages for a while. 'Chilling' involved having huge candy wars, causing more than a few bruises (lollipops hurt when they hit you!), filling one unlucky person who was being antisocial inside's shoes with candy wrappers, and snorting a candy called "Crack Up". When they saw that name, the guys just couldn't resist. *Rolls eyes* Oh, and I took lots of pictures and videos. When the candy wars got boring, and the garage too stuffy, we all spilled outside to run around in the beautiful windy night, and cuddle in my cloak when the wind got cold... Good times. My sister and I got home past 12:30 a.m.. The next day was spent recovering!

In the days since Halloween, I've honestly been rather lazy. I've been goofing off on the computer, reading, thinking... It's been grey outside, and grey days tend to drain me. I hadn't read any novels in monthes, but in the last week I finished three! I know there was something more I wanted to write about. Something just a little profound. But it's grey out, my mind feels slow, and I want to just curl up in a corner and read... So I'll go do that for now. Or do something equally non active. And if I think of any more words to write, there will be another post today. For now, I leave you with some Halloween pic's.

Peace
Idzie



Believe it or not, there's someone swinging on that... But with my camera's night settings, they blur so much they're simply the faintest of shadows...