RULES:
1.Each blogger must post these rules first.
2.Each blogger starts with 8 random facts/habits about themselves.
3.Blogger that are tagged need to write on their own blog about their 8 things.
4.At the end of your blog,you need to choose 8 people to get tagged and list their names.
5.Don't forget to leave them a comment,telling them that they've been tagged and to read your blog.

OK... I was tagged by Smorgan, so here goes!

1. I'm often more comfortable around people slightly younger than me, not because I'm "young for my age" or anything like that, but because I have this huge fear of being judged by people, and somehow that feeling is stronger with people my own age and older. Like somehow I'm expected to get along with them since they're "my age", so there's more pressure... Makes no sense, I know. :-P

2. I stay up super late, even when I'm really tired, just because I really don't want to go to bed.

3. There has only ever been one person outside of my immediate family who has seen the real me in my entirety, and I don't think that person even knows they have!

4. I'm extremely honest. I'm not trying to brag or anything, I just tend to be really honest and very straightforward. That's gotten me in trouble more than once...

5. I find people absolutely fascinating, and even though I'm an introvert, I love being around them. As long as I'm with at least one person I know and trust, I'm happy.

6. I no longer use make up. I went through a stage where I always wore it, but now I feel I'm comfortable enough to not.

7. I'm extremely protective of my sister. I will kick the ass of anyone who dares to mess with her!

8. I sing very often and none too well, as I'm sure my family will tell you. I mostly sing punk songs, and my voice is totally not suited to that. :-P

Now I'm supposed to tag 8 people. Hmmm... I can't think of 8, but I'll tag as many as I can.

Emi
Mom (aka Debbie)
Sheila
Stella
Rochelle
Signe
Hannah

Yay! Nearly 8...

Anyway, I'm planning on a big post with tons of getting-ready-for-Christmas photo's tomorrow, so stay tuned for that!

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
I was tagged, so...
Photo tag
Trips and Ukuleles and Anarchists, Oh My!
The Year 2009
Linkwithin