The summer was just beginning when I last wrote here. The days were hot, and I was very happy for that heat. Summer is always a season with weather I very much enjoy. And now, the leaves are turning colour, the days are mostly cool, and the nights are downright cold. A whole season has passed, and I find myself thinking that it went both very quickly, and at the same time quite slowly.

Though it might be what you're hoping for, this post isn't about unschooling. Or, at least it isn't about the philosophy of unschooling, simply my own attempts to follow what I'm truly passionate about, and make my way in the world.

A whole season without posts, and somewhat sporadic ones before that. Quite a few people have expressed  disappointment at how little I've been writing here, and a very small part of me feels bad. I don't like disappointing people. But for the most part, I'm okay with it. Because honestly, I have to be open about how I'm just not that interested in  education/unschooling anymore. Not that I don't still care about it, just that I don't want it to be my main focus anymore.

This isn't a post to say this blog is ending, though. I would definitely like to keep writing here, when I feel moved to, and there are a handful of draft posts I really do plan on finishing. But I'm going to continue the recent trend of not writing here very often, for the simple reason that this isn't what's calling to me, my mind is mostly taken up with something else.

That something else being, as you might have guessed if you follow me on Twitter or are friends with me on Facebook, food. I love food. As in, really, really love it. Going to farmers markets is one of my favorite outings, lovely vegetables make me skip with joy, cooking something new makes me giddy with excitement. If I'm inside, there's probably at least one cookbook within arms reach. If I'm outside and not directly interacting with someone, I'm probably looking around spotting the edible plants I know, and wondering if the ones I don't recognize are edible. When I watch TV, it's mostly food shows, and if my family had cable, I would probably skip sleeping and just watch The Food Network all night, every night instead. I think you're probably getting the picture.

I like growing food to, because plants are awesome & I get food.

Lest this seem sudden, I've always really liked food, and enjoyed cooking for most of my teens years. And even this more intense passion for food has been around probably two years now. I guess what's mainly changed, as silly as it sounds, is that I've realized food can be my main focus. For some reason, that didn't occur to me at first.

It makes me a bit sad to see that alternative/freedom-based ed has gotten pushed to the side, becoming only one of many interests hanging around at the sidelines of my life, but at the same time, it feels good. What I really want to be focusing on right now, what I'm really interested in, is food firstly, and then radical sustainability, both of which overlap and fit together nicely. It's sad to realize that in many ways, an important phase in my life is over, but at the same time it feels so, so good to genuinely and truly know what I want to be doing. I don't feel like I'm floundering anymore. I might still not know how to go about getting what I want, but now I know what I want!

So right now, I'm trying to get the experience and knowledge necessary to cook professionally, since I really want to be doing that. I've looked into culinary schools, but most aren't really what I'm looking for, and the couple that look interesting are very pricey. Besides, I'm not even really sure that route feels like the one I'd like to take. What I'd really love to do is find some type of apprenticeship or internship type situation, with someone/some restaurant into vegetarian or local/sustainable food. Or possibly bread baking. Though I'm pretty flexible: as long as it's high quality cooking being done, and I don't have to personally do butchering or deal with raw meat, I'm good. An apprenticeship to me would be ideal! So, you know, if any readers have any ideas on how to pursue that, I would be very, very grateful if you'd share them!

When it comes to simply writing online, I think what feels best for me right now is to remain fairly quiet other than occasional posts on this blog. I have considered starting a food themed blog, but I've started so many failed blogs, I don't just want to add another to the list, since I'm really not sure I'd keep it up. I am trying to write down recipes, and write about cool food related experiences, so maybe if I collect enough of those I'll decide a blog might be in order. We'll see. Until then, I still post frequently, though now mostly about food, on Twitter, and if enough people are interested in reading short food-related updates, recipes, and food links, I could always start a Facebook page devoted to that (since I prefer to keep my private Facebook page, where I do a fair bit of that, private)!

I feel a need to thank all you readers for all the encouragement and support and enthusiasm you've shared with me over the years. I'm deeply, profoundly grateful for you all! And I hope, as I make transitions in my life and follow new passions, that you'll choose to stick around so we can continue to connect with each other, share experiences, and all that other stuff that's made me so highly value blogging, and the other online communities I'm a part of!

With best wishes,
Idzie