This is a bit of a follow-up to my previous post, Debating and Discussing.

Many people feel that, because of my age, mainly, my "radical" ideas will likely change (after all, all anarchists are young, right?? *Snorts*). I find this view rather offensive, but I'm not going to go into it now. Many changes happen over time, and I can't know what I'll look like or think like or who I'll be in the future. But I can know that some things are far more integral and essential to me, and have, since I was much younger, been essential to my Being, and those things I think are FAR less likely to change than anything else.

I have a few unshakable values, things that can’t be affected by others opinions, by arguments, by new findings. Things that aren’t up for questioning in my mind, and that I don’t think *can* be “objectively proved”. Things that are rooted firmly in the core of my being, and which without their existence, I would be an entirely different person.

One is the absolute belief that ALL life has inherent value, not just human life, and that the status of “person” does not belong solely to humans (or even solely to other animals). This is what everything else I believe in, support, and live is based on. That the Earth is Alive, that all it’s inhabitants are People, and that the Earth should be respected and revered.

Secondly, I believe humans to be capable of living as free beings (and to deserve the right to live as such): I do not believe that humans “need” to be controlled by others. I believe each human has the inherent ability to lead their own lives and make their own decisions.

All my other opinions and views are just window dressings, really.  They have changed, will quite likely change, and are in a perpetual state of changing, as I think on things and talk to people and read new books and have new experiences…  All my other views are simply those that, with my current experience, most closely line up with my core values.

And those core values, well, I’m pretty damn sure those are here to stay.

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Green Anarchy
A (very) little bit about animism
Unschooling and Anarchy
Anti-civilization, and what that means...
Linkwithin