Last night it was beautiful.

I talked for hours with my mom, discussing everything under the sun. And because we were talking, we were still up a bit past 1:00 am when I heard a noise on the deck. Of course, my paranoid mind going into overdrive, I called for reinforcements in the form of my mother than we switched the outside light on and looked out the door. There, peaking out from behind a bin, was the cutest raccoon I have ever seen. He looked to be young, I'm guessing maybe a year old, and what struck me so much about him was simply his expression. There was no malice in his eyes, no anger, just slight caution, and curiosity. He watched us for several minutes, furry ears sharply perked, before deciding we didn't seem to be any threat and creeping out from behind his hiding place. Once out in the open, and seeing as we still hadn't made any move to harm him, he started ignoring us in favour of the fresh grapes that encircle our deck. I couldn't blame him, really. They are delicious! Sadly it was only the that we thought to get a camera, once the spell was broken a bit. We got a few blurry shots, but although we haven't downloaded them yet I don't think we got any good ones. I will always remember that look on his face though, eyes bright and appraising, full of curiosity and life... Anyone who can look at a beautiful wild creature like that and see only a pest is blind, and anyone who can look at a beautiful wild creature like that and desire to own him, either as a pet or as a fur coat, is simply fucked up. It always feels magical when I come across a wild creature, when we make eye contact, or somehow connect in that short time we are in each others sight, then go our separate ways without ever harming or frightening the other, those moments truly stay with you. Isn't it a sad testament to our current world that those moments are few and far between, and that because of what we've done we've taught most animals to fear, or even hate us? And we have all "learned" that wild animals are vicious, dangerous, and had best be avoided. I want a world with mutual respect, where all of us animals can live together naturally, the way we're supposed to. In case you hadn't noticed, I haven't given up hope yet!


Pictures of my mom and me...



I'll add the raccoon shots when I get them uploaded onto the computer.