Yes, you read that right. Although many seem to think he's the next messiah, I do not like Obama. No, don't worry, I'm not for McCain. McCain is an asshole and Palin is a joke. But for as to why I dislike Obama, I wasn't able to articulate it until today. To be honest, dislike isn't even the right word really, although that's the one I'm using. Unease is probably a better description. But anyway, for weeks I've said I don't really like him, but when confronted with the "why?" I inevitably got when stating my dislike of said presidential candidate, I gave the generic answer that as an anarchist I just don't believe in politics or politicians, which is true, but isn't really the whole story. It's only tonight, while watching the results, the speeches, and the peoples reaction (and discussing all of this with my sister), that I was finally able to truly answer that question. WHY I don't like Obama. My sister is excellent at helping me turn my vague feelings and apprehensions into words someone else can understand, so I thank her for helping me to articulate this.

He's a walking time bomb, as my sister so aptly put it. I'm certainly not the first to wonder wether he'll soon be the target of some sniper. And even if he does live until the end of his term (which I certainly hope he does), everything about him, all the sensationalism and hype and enthusiasm surrounding him seems explosive. I feel like something big, and most likely not good, will happen, whether it's by his direct actions or the actions of someone else.
He's an excellent speaker, there's no denying that. But the words themselves seem empty, if listened to on their own. Empty, and also rather cheesy. It's him who makes the words inspirational, and it scares me how people worship him. Yes, worship. The adoration on the faces of the people in the audience, the tears running down their cheeks. He's loved, and trusted, to such an extant that I feel he could give an inspirational speech about what a good idea it would be to walk off of that cliff, and people would gladly obey.
When I look at his face, I see a mask. Yes, all politicians act, but with some I feel I get a decent sense of what they're really like. Not so with Obama. All Crest smiles and pretty words, he has a perfectly crafted image of the great Barrack Obama always on display. He has it down perfectly. He doesn't seem to make slip-ups. But I have the nasty feeling that's not really the real Barrack...
I saw a very interesting documentary last night on McCain and Obama, and the picture it painted of Obama (seemingly not deliberately on the film makers part, but the picture it painted to me) was of a man who loves the spotlight, of someone who gets a rush from having thousands of adoring fans screaming his name. I also got a picture of a man who does not follow the will of the people, but instead decides what's "best" then convinces the people, with lots of pretty words, that what's "best" in his eyes is what they truly want.
Because he makes people truly believe in a system that's fundamentally corrupt, always has been and always will be, and that caters to the rich, and values production and wealth above all else, including life. People need to look beyond the current system to something better, and he's really not making that an easy thing for people to do.
I do feel like something momentous may be on the horizon, although not at all in the way that Obama talks of change! I never thought I'd be around to see the end of our civilization, but lately I've started to wonder. I DO feel that this civilization has to end, I DO believe it's destroying our earth and will come down sooner or later regardless of what anyone wants, but that doesn't mean I really want it to. I want the world that will come after, I want to help build a world that is better, but the fall scares the crap out of me. I'm the type of person who walks ot of the room when a movie's playing if I think a character I like is going to die. I really don't want the loss of life I'm afraid is going to happen when it all comes crashing down. And yes, I know that doesn't all hinge on Obama, but somehow in my mind they've become closely linked. Only time can tell whether those connections are imaginary or not. So there, my reasons out for all to see.

If you are an Obama supporter, I hope I haven't insulted you, as that really wasn't my intention. It's simply my views. I'd love to hear what others have to say about it, your opinions on the matter, what you think of my take on it all. So please do comment!

Peace (please, let there be peace!)
Idzie
You might also like:
A Canadian girl: thoughts on the two sides of the border
Overview of the Northeast Unschooling Conference 2009!
Unschoolers Winter Waterpark Gathering 2009
An Epic Adventure
Linkwithin