I've been asked to collect unschooling articles for the magazine Homeschooling Horizons. It is a homeschooling magazine, not an unschooling one, and leaning toward the more traditional, religious, styles of homeschooling. However, the editor really does want it to be a balanced mix of all different styles of homeschooling, and that's why I'm now looking for at least ten unschooling articles! I really believe that unschooling is amazing, and I love sharing my love of this educational path, so when I was asked to collect unschooling articles, how could I say no? Many parents who are new to homeschooling, or looking at different options for their kids, pick up this magazine, and I think it would be wonderful if they saw some lovely unschooling articles mixed in there!

We're looking to have about a fifty fifty split between articles by children, teens, and adults who are currently unschooling or have unschooled, and parents who are unschooling their children or teens. So, if you'd like to write an article, that would be awesome! And I'd also ask you to please tell your parents/kids/friends, and/or other unschoolers, about this if you think they'd be interested. :-)

I'm hoping to get a mix of articles from both a radical and plain old unschooling perspective. ;-) Since there will be ten articles running, one for each issue, it's important that not all of the articles are introductions to unschooling, although a couple of those would be good. Any angle, perspective, or particular aspect of unschooling is fine! From a certain religious perspective, how you learn(ed) a specific subject, the story of a specific project or unschooling group...

From the Homeschooling Horizons site:

Length: 2 "page" max! Though we would be happy to break your article up into a two part series, we would prefer to keep article lengths to 900-1500 words. Two-Part articles would appear in consecutive issues.

Fresh stuff please! Original unpublished articles preferred, though reprinted works are acceptable as long as they have not appeared within 3 months of distribution of another publication.

Please send the articles straight to me at anarchist.hippie.child@hotmail.com. I may end up using a different email address if the editor prefers that I use a HH one, but for now this one will do! Oh, and I'd prefer if you sent the article in the main body of the email, instead of as an attachment.

Please include the following statement in your e-mail message, and include your name where it says "[your name]"
I, [your name], give Homeschooling Horizons Magazine permission to publish this article (or articles) in Homeschooling Horizons Magazine (print) and on the Homeschooling Horizons Magazine website (online). I offer this article free-of-charge, and understand that I will not get compensation if this article is published, unless other arrangements have been made in writing prior to publication.
When sending in your piece, specify whether you would like your work proofed or edited. We define as:

- proofing-we just point out the problems-you fix them
- editing-we make the changes-you approve before printing

To read the full submission guidelines, most although not all of which apply in this case, check it out here: Homeschooling Horizons submissions info

If you want to send a photo to go with your article, that's great! Just attach it to the email when you send me the articles. Submission info for photo's can be found here.

I'm really excited about this project, and really hoping that I'll actually get submissions! If you have any questions, you can ask them in a comment on this post, or send them to the above email address, however it'll most likely take me longer to respond to the email.

Thanks so much for reading this, and extra thanks if you want to write something! :-D

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Blame Unschooling!
Learning Advice from a Learning Life
Unschooling
Unschooling is Not Relaxed Homeschooling
Linkwithin