So, you know how I said I was kind of busy working on a couple of projects? Well, the main thing I'm doing right now is starting an unschooling support group in the Montreal area! You may remember when my mom and I attempted to do so in February. Well, that time, someone else was doing the same thing, so we were involved with that briefly, but then it fell through and was temporarily forgotten. Also different about this time is that back in February, my mom and I were starting the group, which really meant I badgered her to do this or that important detail, and she went about things in a way I considered incredibly slow and meandering! This time, however, I simply decided that I really thought that this group was important, that it meant a lot to me that other families have that support, and that therefor *I* should be the one to make it happen. And so I am! I already have a few families interested, I'm looking at were we can meet, and genuinely doing this thing! It feels good to be actually doing what I want to for once, instead of just hoping it'll magically happen, then being disappointed when it doesn't! :-) This is the message I posted to a ton of online groups:

Hello!
Unschooling, Worldschooling, Child Led Learning, Delight Driven Learning, Life Learning… Many names, yet one desire to live in freedom, loving, learning, and living each day to the fullest! That is the joy of Unschooling.
I'm an 18 year old longtime Unschooler, and it was always hard for my family when my sister (16) and I were younger, since pretty much everyone we knew was very school-at-home, and thought we were crazy to be Unschooling! So I want to create something that wasn't there for my family when I was young, but would have made things so much easier for us! What I want to do is bring together a supportive, caring group of Unschooling families, families who are seriously considering Unschooling, and those passionate about Unschooling, who can validate each others choices, share experiences, and just enjoy each others company!
If this sounds as great to you as it does to me (or even if it just interests you) please check out this Yahoo! Group for a bit more information on the support group, and if you're interested in being part of this, please join!
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/unschoolingmontreal/
Still have questions? Feel free to contact me at UnschoolingMontreal@gmail.com
I hope to see you at our first meeting! :-)

I greatly appreciate support from people all over the place, and would love to hear your ideas, suggestions, etc. for the group, but I'd like to keep the Yahoo group as simply an extension of a physical group that actually meets in real life, so please only join the Yahoo group if you're in the Montreal area!
I'm so excited about this!! *Dances around excitedly*
Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Starting an unschooling group in our area!
Unschooling group and gifts
Unschooling Publicity in Montreal
Blame Unschooling!
Linkwithin