For some reason I've yet to mention it on this blog, but I'm heading off to the cottage for a week, leaving on Saturday! It's a family affair, with my mother, father, and I leaving on Saturday, and Emi staying at Trev's for a couple of days so she can go to the Otakuthon (anime convention) with friends, then Emi, Trev, and Nick are all hopping onto a bus and heading out to meet us! Hopefully it'll be a fun week. I wrote about, and posted pictures from, our time at the cottage last year here. Last year, I really didn't have a good time at all... To the extant that I considered staying home this year, until we decided to drag along a couple of cool people to make things more fun! Last Summer was during a big transitioning period for me, and I felt really judged and looked down upon by a couple of the adult people there. At this point, that's something I feel much more equipped to handle, but last year I was insecure enough as it was, without other people adding to it! I was just talking to my mother last night, about all sorts of interesting things, and out of curiosity I asked my sister and her if I'd changed all that much since last year. They answered with a resounding yes! Now, I know that I feel I've changed, but I wondered if my family saw as much change as I did! Seemingly, they see even more. Apparently I'm a lot more confident, and simply older. I suppose that shouldn't really come as a surprise, and doesn't really, but it was still interesting to hear from others about that... So I'm going to try very hard to enjoy myself this year. The woman who made disparaging remarks last year, and has continued to make disparaging remarks since then to my parents, no longer bothers me, in the sense I really don't give a crap about her unwanted opinions (my parents are no more impressed with those comments than I am, either)! I'm happy with who I am, I know what I want in life, how I feel about things, and what other people say can no longer affect those things in any sort of major way. The only thing that bothers me is the fact that dealing with people who are being negative does make things more stressful, because I can't just relax and let my guard down... Which is why there are friends there for me to hang out with instead! :-) And a few good books, of course. And a lake. And wildlife. And a sky unpolluted by city lights, the milky way winding clearly across the sky... Yes, I'll have a good time. Hopefully I'll also take a ton of pictures!

Enjoy your week everyone!

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Cottage photos
A long week away...
Unschoolers Winter Waterpark Gathering 2009
Overview of the Northeast Unschooling Conference 2009!
Linkwithin