There are five Ryerson graduate students making a documentary about unschooling, which is pretty exciting!  Today, I spent a little while talking on Skype to the reporter for the story, about growing up unschooled, and some other basic questions (they're still looking for both a grown unschooler and an unschooling family, in the Toronto area, who would be willing to be interviewed/filmed, so if you're interested, let me know and I'll put you in touch!)... 



Right after that, I started looking through my "to respond" folder, which stretches back several months, and feeling really guilty about all of the unschooling questions people have asked that I've yet to answer.
And then I started thinking how easy it is to answer questions on Skype.  How I both usually enjoy it more, and how it takes about five minutes on Skype to answer a question that would take me fifteen minutes if I were to answer it in email (thinking about phrasing and proofreading and all that.  When answering questions about unschooling via email, I feel like I'm just writing a private post!  No less effort goes into it.).

So I thought "hey, I can tell people that if they want to ask me questions, add me on Skype, arrange a time to chat through email, or just poke me if I'm online!".

But then, quick on the heels of that thought, came the thought that lots of people like asking me questions.  Grown unschoolers aren't always easy to find, and thus are in high demand when they are found!  What if that ends up taking up a lot of time?

At which point another idea came along...  What if I put up a donation button?  And said that I am happy to answer questions for anyone who feels a need to ask, and don't expect any compensation, but if you want to give me a little something for my time, if you have it to spare, that would be really great.

So the point of this post is simply to ask if you think this is a horrible idea, or if this might just be a good one?  I have this huge feeling that what I say is SO not worth anyone spending their money on, but if it's an entirely optional donation button and is just sitting there if people want to use it, then it's out of my hands and thus in theirs, right?

You can probably tell I'm very unsure of this idea that popped into my head a mere fifteen minutes ago.  So, your feedback is very much appreciated!
You might also like:
Against the Current: Talk from the Toronto Unschooling ...
The Frustration of Being That Unschooled Person
Grown Unschooler Anna J. Cook: "The experience of ...
Blame Unschooling!
Linkwithin