Today has been a bit strange, or at least the latter half of it has been. I'm swirling full of deep emotions, deep thoughts. Everything has seemed strangely full of meaning, and each new thing I saw while I was out before would start a new eddy of confused thoughts. And in case you were wondering, all of this was entirely without the use of illegal substances.

I started writing this while I was out before, sitting in the car while my mum went inside to buy something at a store, just looking around and thinking.

The rain-snow mix that has been falling off and on all day has paused for now, and the street that winds along the shoreline is covered in water. Warm yellow streetlights turn the puddles that litter the broken old pavement into tiny golden pools, that shimmer invitingly.

As we drew away in the car though, everything seemed to be less pretty than I'd first thought, the puddles on the street reflecting brief flashes of light, gold from the streetlamps, white-blue and red from car lights, cluttered and bright. The sidewalks looked worn out, and pipes and gravel were heaped on them where they're doing construction work.

I sat in gloom, brought on by me overreacting to being interrupted while I was writing (I hate being interrupted while I'm writing), until we arrived at the library, where I ran into a childhood friend whom I haven't seen in years. We talked for a while. She's 20, starting university soon, living on her own, and doing pretty good. When I said goodbye and we drove off, though, memories just kept spinning through my head. Us dancing through the streets barefoot in long skirts, pretending we were pioneers (I was absolutely obsessed with pioneers for quite a while when I was young), the tea parties we'd have, with the tea being made from various herbs we gathered from her mothers garden, thrown into random combination's that somehow always managed to be drinkable... I just couldn't help thinking how fast time passes.

So we drove in the dark, the streetlights making yellow blurs as we passed, a bus making a considerably larger blueish blur as it passed, looking strangely surreal... Talking with mom about old memories... While everything just kept going strangely surreal and full of meaning, sadness/happiness/loss/uncertainty/confusion/optimism. That's the best description I can give.

While I just tried to make sense of all the thoughts, all the emotions I couldn't fully grasp.

It's been a strange day, yet between those strange bits, it's also been utterly normal. I had many perfectly normal, everyday, thoughts and feelings, some perfectly normal conversations, and I came home and watched a perfectly normal show. There's just been this kind of overshadowing of deeper things...

Like I said, I'm in a strange mood tonight.

Peace,
Idzie
You might also like:
Gaspe, the old house, memories from my childhood...
This Year in Life... Including Dogs, Trips, Zines and ...
Grown Unschooler Anna J. Cook: "The experience of ...
Trips and Ukuleles and Anarchists, Oh My!
Linkwithin