Ages ago, I'd post semi-regular posts with cool links and stuff I'd recently discovered on this blog.  But, I fell out of the habit of doing so, and I've been realizing recently how much cool stuff I find online then lose completely, never to see again.  So, I've decided to start doing (roughly) weekly posts, most likely on Sundays (just because I arbitrarily decided I want to do so on Sundays), with the cool stuff I've read/seen/discovered in the past week.  Welcome to the first installment of the weekly link roundup!

Education, Unschooling, Learning, Youth Rights

A cool looking calendar put together by a couple who traveled through Asia visiting "innovative educational organizations", and are selling a calendar with photos from their trip to finance a documentary about said trip.



"Love Letter To Albuquerque Public Schools" is a truly terrific group slam poem.

 "Reading articles about 'school reform' is like reading articles about how to build a better zoo. God bless all the kids who are running wild in the woods whether they 'get an education' or not. There are more important things in life." -Bob Collier
 “Education itself is a putting off, a postponement; we are told to work hard to get good results. Why? So we can get a good job. What is a good job? One that pays well. Oh. And that’s it? All this suffering, merely so that we can earn a lot of money, which, even if we manage it, will not solve our problems anyway? It’s a tragically limited idea of what life is all about.” -Tom Hodgkinson

"Whenever I see kids in school uniforms I think of totalitarian societies and their unfree subjects. I think of prisoners in their jumpsuits. I sometimes think of the UPS guy and the clerks at Home Depot. I never think of freedom. Not ever." -PS Pirro, in her book 101 Reasons Why I'm an Unschooler.

"Breakthroughs are made by the non-conformists and unconventional people. And that requires stepping outside of one’s comfort zone, outside of the familiar or the contrived. It requires imagination." -Beatrice Ekwa Ekoko, from this months Life Learning Magazine.

The November issue of The Carnival of Unschooled Life is out.

I found this wonderful anti-school video on Facebook, called Herd Mentality - The Schooling System. "School is an 18 year forced government training program..."

Recently released is the English version of the trailer for a web series on education which will be airing soon. The translation is a bit shaky, but not too bad! The first few episodes will focus on what's wrong with schools and schooling, and the following episodes will focus on solutions (he talks to freeschoolers, homeschoolers, & unschoolers, including me and my mother). The director is a co-conspirator in multiple cool projects here in Montreal, and I'm really excited to see this!  


"When we adults think of children, there is a simple truth which we ignore: childhood is not preparation for life; childhood is life. A child isn’t getting ready to live; a child is living. The child is constantly confronted with the nagging question, 'What are you going to be?' Courageous would be the youngster who, looking the adult squarely in the face, would say, 'I’m not going to be anything; I already am.' We adults would be shocked by such an insolent remark, for we have forgotten, if indeed we ever knew, that a child is an active participating and contributing member of society from the time he is born. Childhood isn’t a time when he is molded into a human who will then live life; he is a human who is living life. No child will miss the zest and joy of living unless these are denied him by adults who have convinced themselves that childhood is a period of preparation. How much heartache we would save ourselves if we would recognize the child as a partner with adults in the process of living, rather than always viewing him as an apprentice. How much we would teach each other… adults with the experience and children with the freshness. How full both our lives could be. A little child may not lead us, but at least we ought to discuss the trip with him, for after all, life is his and her journey too. – Professor T. Ripaldi, discovered via this blog post.

Equality, Social Justice, Radical Politics.

Charges against G20 activist dropped.

“Institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution” -Clay Shirky

"I don’t believe in charity. I believe in solidarity. Charity is so vertical. It goes from the top to the bottom. Solidarity is horizontal. It respects the other person. I have a lot to learn from other people.” – Eduardo Galeano 

Miscellaneous

Unjob Yourself!: A New Paradigm of Work and Life by Wendy Priesnitz is a great article on unjobbing and working for yourself.