dear readers it 's here ! it 's finally here ! alejandro s sorceress , the long awaited e novella that s loosely part of the atlantis series , by me as alyssa day , is out today , april th , for only cents ! ! and with other books free ! buy links nook ! kindle ! kindle uk ! itunes ! kobo ! have a peek she murmured or moaned , a tiny sound , and tightened her hold on him , and he was lost i need you , he said roughly , his voice like sandpaper i don t know why or how , but i do please please she put her hands on his face and pulled back a little to study his face , and the wildness and desire he saw in her unbelievably blue eyes drove him over the brink of the abyss yes , she said one tiny word that changed his entire world reader reviews are already coming in and readers are telling me they 're laughing out loud and loving this story ! ! that funny little novella written around alejandro , a supporting character from atlantis unleashed , will be in e bookstores today , april th ! after a life lived in the darkness , alejandro deserved some sunshine so i gave him a funny witch with a crazy family to fall in love with i hope you are as happy for alejandro as i am ! and since i took soooo long to get this one to you , i m not only giving it to you for only cents , but i m giving you other authors stories for free ! ! yes , alejandro s sorceress is part of the dark and deadly bad boys of paranormal romance boxed set , with jennifer ashley , caris roane , bonnie vanak , erin quinn , erin kellison , felicity heaton and laurie london ! all the news , in quick bites the lonesome young , a hot , crazy suspenseful , contemporary young adult novel by me as lucy connors came out last week ! it will be in an ad in people magazine the th ! ! thud faints in excitement i ll be at the rt convention in new orleans from may please come see me ! the cursed was an rt book club reviewer s choice award nominee for best paranormal novel of , but i'm thrilled for my friend nalini singh , who won thhe category this year ! last year , i took the grand prize for paranormal romance with heart of atlantis if you haven t checked out luke and rio s adventures , be sure to do so before the unforgiven , book , comes out sometime this fall winter ! two more books in the league of the black swan trilogy will be coming ! and yes , in atlantis , i still promise to write denal and jack ! i recently finally came out about my struggles with depression , after far too long spent hiding because i was ashamed so now i am working to help break the stigma on this horrible illness if you or anyone you love suffers from depression , please ask for help let s make depression our bitch , instead of the other way around ! thank you for reading this far ! ! i ll be back next month wth exciting news on future books ! ! as always , please share this newsletter with anyone you think might be interested ! if you re like to get news of what i m up to , check out my website , and or my lucy connors website , and please like my page on facebook or chat with me on twitter i love , love , love to hear from readers and you can email me here hugs , alyssa