well i have just had the craziest week in my entire life big news dum dah dah dum ! ! ! those were trumpets and now for the drum roll i m pregnant ! i found out the night before thanksgiving which means i had to face the scariest day of the year medication free and completely freaked out i did pretty well actually i told the family and they were so excited plus throwing up when your pregnant is completely acceptable so had i than it wouldn t have been a big deal but i didn t so why am i am telling all of you when i hardly know you and i am not in the safe zone yet ? because you already know all the most intimate secrets of my life anyway , and my anxiety has skyrocketed the last few days because of it and i need the release i need to document my feelings and like always , maybe i can help someone who is going through the same thing i am praying that everything goes well but i know the chances of miscarrying and if it happens well than that s another trial for me to have to overcome and i am sure my anxiety will somehow be swirled into that as well but in the meantime i would appreciate any warm thoughts my way j so here s the latest dilemma i stopped both medications as soon as i found out one doctor told me over the thanksgiving hotline that zoloft was ok to take , but i still want to make sure with my family doctor before i continue to take it i don t know if stopping so soon without weaning off is worse for me or not today was the first day that i would have been able to ask but their nurse hasn t returned my call i guess i will try again tomorrow so my morning anxiety is very strong every morning i feel this huge pressure to eat a lot and eat healthy because i have a lot of weight i need to gain and this time i can t just blow it off like i can do what i want because it s not just about me anymore but by lunchtime and afternoon i have calmed down , and by evening i am extremely excited and happy so the stress and the pressure are high right now i know that i need to gain around pounds and that scares me i have been doing well to eat a lot and eat healthy so far i have gained some weight already so that is encouraging , and my appetite is pretty good still i don t think i have had morning sickness yet the funny thing is that i don t know how to determine whether i am just anxious or feeling pregnant nausea since the symptoms might be the same for me if i feel nauseous i immediately get anxious so it s going to be interesting to see how i handle it i am hoping that i will be able to use the coping strategies that i have learned this past year to help me through any nausea so how will this affect the blog ? i don t think it will affect it much my anxiety isn t going anywhere anytime soon so keep comin back for more ! you might also like oh boy or girl ? ! ? why do we shut people out when we need them the most ? worst fears sometimes do come true they 're here linkwithin