photo by space potato seriously , is recovery even real ? or is it something doctors make up to tell their patients so that they will keep coming back over and over again for more medication , more therapy , more hope can someone with anxiety ever be normal ? i have been trying to be grateful and soak in the goodness i have been feeling lately since i have n't had a full on panic attack but that does n't mean i am cured i am far from it i still get anxious and i have anticipatory anxiety and i am majorly avoiding my fears this weekend i have a conference for work that involves a luau and a family bbq did i think to myself , oh that sounds like fun i ca n't wait to go no in fact i put down that i would n't be attending why ? because i do n't know how to drive there and i do n't want to stress about trying to find it myself or feel stupid for putting someone out of their way for a ride also because i will be going alone and i do n't feel like having to eat at a small table with other coworkers since that is really hard for me so what am i doing ? i am avoiding the whole situation but then i feel guilty that i am giving into my fears and i ca n't do that so i think i have talked myself into going to one of them i also have some friends coming over friday to see our new room in our basement and we 'll have a bbq am i crazy ? i want them to come over yes , but i do n't want to bbq i am dreading the bbq anytime i think about it i get butterflies what is wrong with me ? i should be excited to see friends my friend at work who has been nothing but nice to me is having a baby shower aug rd that happens to be my year anniversary i should be really bummed that i wo n't be able to make it , but instead its a huge relief because i wo n't have to worry about eating in front of a bunch of women i guess i am letting the victim and the perfectionist in , but i ca n't help but feel like enough is enough i want to feel what recovery tastes like just a sample to me recovery does n't mean the panic attacks are gone recovery means i look at social events with my friends , family , and coworkers as something to look forward to , something to want to be involved in recovery means not avoiding life is that even possible ? will this always be something i manage , like some chronic illness ? i 've read that you can be cured in months to a couple years i think i have to see it to believe it what does recovery mean to you ? if you enjoyed this post subscribe to the reality of anxiety you might also like master rather than victim of my mind i hate anxiety and worrying about work performance theres no need to push myself are we talking ourselves into panicking ? linkwithin