if your bullshit detector is not screaming , it 's broken charleshughsmith blogspot com data scientists find connections between birth month and health medicalxpress com what 's your sign ? learn your ailment click to enlarge the u s ca n't count on technology to revive the job market harvard business review indeed , we can count on it to destroy the job market , as it 's doing all the happy workers theatlantic com fantastic long form piece talking about worker ennui disengagement , apathy , depression , alienation , absenteeism presenteeism the management led cult of positivity and implications for productivity the real point of prohibition angrybearblog com prohibition was all about maintaining maximum productivity on the factory floor sure , church ladies endorsed prohibition , but in the end it was a straight up productivity grab by an owner class that never stopped drinking samuel clemens with john t lewis one of the possible models for jim in huckleberry finn mark twain recalls his mother delanceyplace com and talks about slavery amazing piece the online privacy lie is unraveling techcrunch com in real life , the most intensive and intrusive everyday spying is done by marketers , not government even affluent americans strongly support higher taxes on the rich nakedcapitalism com gop presidential candidates need to read and understand this amartya sen the economic consequences of austerity newstatesman com in this superb long form post , nobel laureate amartya sen reminds us what austerity did for germany after world war i , and what it 's doing for or to modern economies today concerns over earthquakes spread to texas oilprice com does the central bank 's balance sheet matter ? philosophyofmoney net a mercilessly wonkish piece that argues convincingly albeit in a roundabout way for direct payments to households as a legitimate qe tool if the whole point of quantitative easing is to stimulate the economy , why not stimulate it directly , by injecting money into households rather than into banks or bond markets ? seems radical now wo n't be , in a couple of years where are we with market valuations ? gurufocus com as of , the stock market is likely to return a year in the next years no misprint the warren buffett economy why its days are numbered davidstockmanscontracorner com david stockman explains why the recovery is not a recovery check out the graphs and decide for yourself cisco 's john chambers predicts of companies will be dead in years businessinsider com the age of the dinosaurs is ending china 's greenhouse gas emissions may have already peaked businessspectator com au , not due to enlightened environmental policy are you kidding ? but economic contraction which raises the question of whether ghg emissions might not be a better overall economic indicator than gdp with a series of major hacks , china builds a database on americans wapo why are libertarians mostly white dudes ? newrepublic com women and non whites reject the idea that government is out to get them this is why rand paul 's popularity with female voters rounds off to zero please share today 's water cooler links ! and join us here every friday for news of the weird and wonkish have you checked out my free book mental health myths debunked ? tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more documented , with links to sources and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend retweet this post ! many thanks to the great folks who retweeted me yesterday have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression