i was recently privileged to watch the documentary jodorowski 's dune , which has been showing on cable tv in the u s if you have n't seen it , seek it out as soon as you can it may have the same remarkable effect on you that it has had on me it has changed how i think of what i do as a writer and that 's pretty profound , in and of itself alejandro jodorowski until i saw the documentary , i 'd had no idea , frankly , who jodorowski was i now think of him as the sole legitimate living heir of fellini or that he had been among the first to obtain film rights circa to frank herbert 's great space epic the very first person to option dune was arthur p jacobs , who died of a heart attack soon after taking the project on the story of jodorowski 's involvement with dune is quite literally fantastic , in every sense jodorowski 's vision of dune was and is breathtaking he aproached tangerine dream , pink floyd , and magma to do the music for acting talent , he enlisted salvador dali , orson welles , david carradine , mick jagger , and others he signed artists h r giger , chris foss , and jean giraud for set and character design he wooed and signed dan o'bannon for special effects the storyboards quickly grew to , lovingly crafted images by the time jodorowski went to hollywood to look for a studio with whom to partner on production and distribution , much of the million budget had already been spent in pre production and the script had ballooned to the point where a hour movie was inevitable predictably , the major hollywood studios although impressed with jodorowski 's pre production work , and his roster of signed names did n't know what to do with a hour shakespearean space drama no one would touch it and so , the great tragedy of jodorowski 's dune is that it never got made and yet the great triumph is , it did get made , in other ways dan o'bannon went on to write alien h r giger designed the monster for alien george lucas , directly or indirectly , used various herbert tropes and motifs in star wars we see echoes of jodorowski 's vision in the terminator movies , in contact , prometheus , blade runner plus , jodorowski 's storyboards for dune spawned a series of groundbreaking science fiction comic books , most notably the incal which has been described as having a claim to be the best comic book ever written and also technopriests and metabarons jodorowski 's reaction to hollywood 's objections to the film is instructive studios told him but the movie will be fourteen hours long ! to which jodorowski replied so what ? so , what ? jodorowski 's attitude was that film is cheap , and anyway , film is n't just film properly conceived , it 's art and art , properly so called , is whatever it needs to be if it needs to be minutes of improvisational piano meditations packaged as ten vinyl records in a boxed set keith jarrett 's sun bear concerts , let it be that if it needs to be a volume , million word novel proust , la recherche du temps perdu , let it be that if it needs to be a hour film that takes seven nightly trips to the theatre to see in its entirety then why not ? let it be the first such ! someone has to be the first to do it , yes ? jodorowski wanted salvador dali to play a certain part in dune he tracked the elusive artist down dali asked can i have a helicopter ? jodorowski yes , you can have a helicopter dali can i have a burning giraffe ? jodorowski you can have a burning giraffe dali said he would have to think about it , but added that for him to do the film , he would have to emerge as the highest paid actor in motion picture history jodorowski calculated the onscreen time of the character it was something like six minutes , total jodorowski 's reply you 'll be paid , per onscreen minute dali was delighted he agreed to do the film this was jodorowski 's approach think big go all the way no limits do whatever it takes let the work be whatever it needs to be how many of us work that way ? do you work that way ? or are you contrained by industry rules , genre requirements , someone else 's preconceived notion of what art is the status quo orthodoxy best practices fucking recipes your own ideas are they your own ? or are you force fitting what you do into someone else 's pre measured box ? a first novel should n't be more than , words a good story should n't have more than a dozen characters a story should n't be heavy with description why , not ? this is a new era for publishing i was talking with my wife about this she mentioned marcel duchamp , our favorite artist she had only to mention his name i knew at once what she was thinking if you have n't yet read calvin tomkin 's biography of duchamp , run , do n't walk , to your nearest library or bookstore and obtain a copy at once and i thought to myself publishing is at a crossroads , now , similar to that faced by visual artists in the years just after world war i it 's possible , now , for publishing no longer encumbered by the old rules of ink and pulp , circa no longer laboring under the heavy handed hegemonic control of a few all powerful big publishers to go in entirely new directions if a book needs to be words on paper , it can be but if it needs to be more than that whatever more means , it can be that , instead it can be think about it what does your work need to be ? what does it demand to be ? what does it cry out to be ? let it be that but you ca n't oh really ? why , not ?