in an interview published in the columbia journalism review , seymour hersh who you may recall broke the my lai story in talks about the sad state of investigative journalism and remarks candidly on the lamentable tendency of editors and reporters , now , to rush to publication with the thinnest of viral headlines after doing little or no research i was reminded as i am daily of the truth of hersh 's observations by the recent coverage of california 's well known and quite real water supply problems the coverage has n't always been very good to put it mildly example in the context of the water crisis , reuters got a surprising amount of play out of their recent exclusive , california used million gallons of water in fracking in , a headline that huffpost , businessinsider , and others piggybacked off of to the tune of tens of thousands of social shares in the rush to beat up on frackers , no one looked at the number million gallons of water a year and said okay , so , is that a significant number ? or a ridiculously lame red herring ? let 's do a quick reality check in , the state of californa seized and destroyed million mairjuana plants we can assume that was probably a small fraction of the total marijuana grown in the state right ? according to a recent plos one paper , marijuana is a high water use plant , consuming up to liters of water per day in one documented case , a single grower used , gallons of water to raise plants across the growing season , one plant can easily consume , gallons of water so do the math if the state of california is seizing well over a million marijuana plants a year and each plant can consume well over , gallons of water , that 's more than a billion gallons a year for just the plants that get confiscated yet somehow , when reuters supposedly a mature news organization rushes to press with a bullshit story about frackers using million gallons of water , it goes viral as if the crime of the century has been committed yes , fracking is water intensive yes , it pollutes yes , it causes earthquakes yes , it 's evil on a lot of levels that 's not the point the question is what kind of junior dipshit know nothing editor went right to press with a story about a lousy million gallons of water a year being used in fracking , without asking the reporter a few simple questions first ? for example all dialog fictional , all characters made up editor how does that compare with the amount of water consumed in , say , marijuana production ? reporter doing a few google searches hmm , let me see oh , well , actually , it looks like marijuana cultivation in the state of california uses hundreds of times more water than that maybe thousands of times more ! editor well then , that 's your story not this fracking stuff right ? reporter uh , right editor and by way , how much water do californians actually use , overall ? reporter i do n't know but i know the state only has one year of water left editor how do you know that ? reporter a nasa guy said it in the la times editor but the times retracted the headline , right ? because that 's not really what the guy said reporter dumb shit know nothing blank stare editor you mean you did n't read this ? editor points at ipaid on the screen http mashable com california water nasa reporter um , no editor california 's above ground reservoirs can hold only three years' worth of water when they 're full okay ? so a one year reserve is not the end of the world groundwater is what counts got me ? reporter wait is that a line from chinatown ? editor and by the way , californians use billion gallons of water per day okay ? and leaky faucets and toilets account for almost of household water consumption reporter so in other words , leaky toilets editor waste a hundred times more water every day than frackers do in a year , yes exactly reporter which means the governor 's order to cut back on consumption by editor is completely doable yeah for sure but the bigger story here is reporter hold on , there 's a bigger story ? editor there 's always a bigger story in this case , it 's the fact that the california water emergency is part of a global situation that will have half the world 's population facing 'high water stress' by reporter whoa boss , you amaze me how do you know all this stuff ? editor because i fact check i do research it 's what i do i use my brain i ask questions i try to get to the bottom of things i do n't just run with the first viral sounding bullshit clickbait headline some junior reporter throws at me i leave that crap for huffington post have you checked out my free book mental health myths debunked ? tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth ect is dangerous and consent forms lie but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend i want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on twitter my advice ? follow these guys they retweet ! have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression