the crisis in non fiction publishing theguardian com , or how non fiction books have become really , really long tweets online is irl terribleminds com chuck wendig with an important reminder that there 's no online persona , online brand , etc there 's just you donna bahorich , homeschooler head of texas board of ed texas board of ed will be headed by a homeschooler dailykos com anyone else see the problem here ? why do neoliberals push austerity ? jacobinmag com because it serves the class interest of the precious snowflake too delicate to tax upper class whatever makes you poor makes them richer why is this so hard to understand ? from doubles tennis to internet porn my year as a supreme court clerk , by ted cruz politco com actually very fun to read kudos , cruz conservatives frustrated by gop 's inability to attract working women wapo shocker female heads of households are increasingly alienated by rich old white guys al gore too early to back hillary clinton pagesix com little known fact gore 's venture capital firm , generation investment management , was founded in london with david blood , yet somehow they did n't name it blood gore since , the u s has lost million manufacturing jobs and gained million waiters and bartenders via zerohedge click to enrage connecticut sees reduction in firearms homicides after gun law eurekalert org fbi builds silencers for the mentally ill tm durusau net this is how our government pads the domestic terrorist numbers ? bizarre psychotherapy is becoming less effective this blog we 're living in psychotherapy 's end times the church of self help slate com there s a reason the poor don t rise up against inequality our culture shames them contingent workers make up of the workforce gao gov soon to be puerto rico 's pain tied to u s wage system wsj com but will they leave the dollarzone ? who will own the robots ? technologyreview com or will they own us ? self serve mcdonalds how technology destroys jobs technologyreview com article is from , but still important for understanding what 's happening to the economy dutch city of utrecht to try universal basic income independent co uk also see a world without work theatlantic com and as to how it gets paid for the basic affordability of basic income huffingtonpost com join us here every friday for freakonomic news of the weird and wonkish ! have you checked out my free book mental health myths debunked ? tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more documented , with links to sources and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself ! it 's all laid out plain as day with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend i want to thank the following individuals for retweeting me yesterday have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression