complex life a billion years earlier than thought ? phys org well preserved multicellular structures dating to billion years ago have been found in china the question is what are they ? bacterial mats ? or eukaryotic tissues of some kind ? what the heck is it ? organic fragments extracted from the host rock of the gaoyuzhuang fossils show well preserved cellular structure credit maoyan zhu why does happiness inequality matter ? greatergood berkeley edu maybe income inequality is n't the only thing we should be concerned about ? read , also , the lessons from bhutan the privatization of childhood play psmag com a serious essay about playdates gallup americans favor single payer health care system gallup com only of americans oppose socialized medicine , a deeply embarrassing and inconvenient fact for hillary clinton , who vows that single payer health care will never , ever happen in the u s teen with brain tumor barred from prom mcclatchydc com a eukaryote without a mitochondrial organelle cell com another anomaly for bio geeks of course , true bio geeks know this is not the only such organism ever discovered but it 's still fascinating the dark web has its own literary magazine wired com how to memorize a random bit string isi edu from nonsense poetry , security chrome is about to kill flash theregister co uk oh hell yes , do it now ! we all pay for low wages counterpunch org from the article raising the federal minimum wage to an hour would save an estimated billion per year for u s taxpayers , according to a study by the economic policy institute the epi s study , balancing paychecks and public assistance , found that , not surprisingly , low wages equal government help purged , hacked , switched on election fraud allegations in hillary clinton vs bernie sanders counterpunch org for those who did vote provisionally or by affidavit , the vast majority of their votes have not counted this includes , uncounted affidavit ballots in new york city alone and , uncounted provisional ballots in maricopa county , arizona funny , i thought this was supposed to be a democracy u s special forces wage secretive 'small wars' against terrorists cnn com your tax dollars at work yanis varoufakis on why hillary clinton is a dangerous person businessinsider com a fine one minute video does the placebo effect influence consumer product purchases ? npr org novices play better golf when they have expensive brand name equipment thanks for visiting be sure to check out prior weeks' water coolers see links at right many , many thanks to the fine folks below who retweeted me recently on the twitter follow these tweeps they retweet ! buy my books or at least click for more info have you added your name to our mailing list ?