yahoo ! ceo and liar scott thompson on may , activist shareholder dan loeb pointed out that yahoo ! ceo scott thompson never obtained a degree in computer science , despite what his official yahoo ! bio claims the bio has since been altered apparently , thompson has been lying about his credentials for at least ten years when thompson worked for ebay as cto of the paypal division , his bio contained the statement scott received a bachelor s in accounting and computer science from stonehill college there 's only one problem stonehill did not begin awarding computer science degrees until four years after thomspon graduated thompson 's bachelor 's degree is actually in business administration less often reported is the fact that yahoo ! board member patti hart who vetted thompson 's hiring doctored her bio , also , to show a degree in economics and marketing in actual fact , hart 's degree like thompson 's is in business administration yahoo ! issued a statement calling thompson 's out and out lie an inadvertent error which is , itself , a lie yahoo ! board member patti hart so lying is endemic at the highest levels of yahoo which ought to be quite demoralizing to yahoo ! employees and apparently it is interestingly , yahoo 's own code of ethics , which you can download here if you 're interested , requires employees to among other things make sure information we disclose about our company is clear , truthful , and accurate it also cautions employees to avoid exaggerating apparently , yahoo 's code of ethics means absolutely nothing , since board members and executive officers do n't obey it ordinary employees at yahoo ! now must come to grips with the fact that there are two standards of behavior at yahoo ! , one of which applies to them , the other of which applies to bigwigs at the top if any ordinary employee did what thompson and hart have done , he or she would be fired in an instant but ceo thompson has n't been fired and even if he is , he 'll leave with millions of dollars in severance the whole episode including yahoo 's unbelievable lack of urgency in dealing with the situation sends a bad message not only about yahoo ! but about corporate america it says that corporate codes of ethics need n't mean anything , and lying in both corporate bios and sec statements is acceptable at the level of ceos and board members we 'll see , soon enough , if at also means you get paid big bucks on the way out the door