i made up this checklist as a quick way to gauge whether a company is or might be considered evil it 's not a definitive list , by any means , and there is no right or wrong way to score a company against this list in the end , you have to decide whether you think a given company is evil or not this list is meant only as a guide , a starting point for discussion does your company value profits over people ? this is easy to check when earnings are threatened , does the company simply lay off workers ? most companies follow this kneejerk policy , since people costs salaries and benefits constitute the single biggest cost for most companies does your company engage in deceptive , monopolistic , or anti competitive business practices ? does your company routinely lie to customers in its advertising ? does your company engage in unfair or deceptive hr practices , such as billing a hr week job as being hours per week , or hiring two part time workers without benefits in lieu of one full time worker with benefits , or failing to promote women or minorities ? e g , are executives mostly men ? does your company pay zero taxes ? many large companies e g , general electric manage to escape paying taxes altogether even in profitable years http www reuters com article us usa tax corporate idustreac whether this is done legally or illegally does n't matter if as some say corporations are persons , not paying your fair share in taxes makes you a bad person regardless of what the law says does your company accept corporate welfare subsidies or bailout money from government ? according to the cato institute , the u s federal government spent billion on corporate welfare during fiscal year a year in which there was no recession recipients that year included boeing , xerox , ibm , motorola , dow chemical , and general electric does your company spend money on lobbying ? check your company 's lobbying track record at http www opensecrets org lobbying , by definition , is an attempt to exert influence on lawmakers by circumvention of normal democractic processes which is inherently unethical does your company endorse political candidates or contribute to their campaigns ? it should be obvious that corporations have no legitimate role in politics they should not tell workers how to vote and should n't spend shareholder money on politicians' reelection campaigns does your company pollute the environment ? what is your company 's green agenda ? does it even have one ? does your company have overseas subsidiaries or contractors who pollute the environment ? does your company routinely outsource jobs to countries where labor is cheap and labor laws are lax ? suppose your company hires workers from north america , europe , and asia during good times but tends to lay off workers in north america or europe preferentially during bad times allowing asians to remain on the payroll this is the same as exporting jobs to asia it 's a very common tactic , and it escapes notice because in good times , the company does not appear to be favoring any one geo does your company use layoffs as a way to tailor hr ratios ? this is a very common tactic for example , in technology , companies often go out of their way to try to obtain more female employees since women traditionally have not been drawn to technology , and the ratio of male to female workers in tech is consequently high big companies like to beef up their female to male percentages as much as possible to avoid lawsuits so that when a woman is fired , she ca n't claim sexual discrimination when layoffs occur , many companies will preferentially lay off male workers to balance the ratios i have personally seen this practice in action , at one large company , where layoffs were viewed as an opportunity to balance all kinds of hr ratios i believe it is one reason but certainly not the only reason why the most recent recession was particularly hard on men see for example http www spiegel de international germany , , , html , and http mjperry blogspot com male recession gender jobs gap html , and http healthland time com why the recession may trigger more depression among men do the company 's top people earn more than times the median of all workers ? the economic policy institute and the institute for policy studies have both studied ceo pay ratios across a variety of industries in a variety of countries in most of the industrialized world , the ceo pay ratio is or less in the u s , it tends to be well over and in some years it has been or higher see http articles moneycentral msn com investing extra ceosnearrecordpayratios aspx and http www aflcio org corporatewatch paywatch there is no reason for any one human being in any one company to make times what another human being makes , and in fact most companies could find talented volunteers to fill cxo positions for far less money than certainly anything in excess of is just that needless excess steve jobs paid himself a dollar a year at apple he did own a lot of stock , of course more ceos should follow his example