today on twitter i happened to catch an interesting series of tweets the first comes from well known literary agent sara megibow the nelson agency the followup tweets are from romance writer cassandra carr take a look at the tweets below pay close attention if you 're a fiction writer working on a novel sara megibow saramegibow querying in ? know your genre ! genre can loosely be defined as , in what section of the bookstore will your book be shelved ? pubtip pm jan , people are talking about this twitter ads info and privacy jan , sara megibow saramegibow querying in ? know your genre ! genre can loosely be defined as , in what section of the bookstore will your book be shelved ? pubtip cassandra carr cassandra carr saramegibow ha ! i just posted same thing about genre after seeing a twitter profile w na erotic romance post apocalyptic suspense thriller pm jan , see cassandra carr 's other tweets twitter ads info and privacy jan , sara megibow saramegibow querying in ? know your genre ! genre can loosely be defined as , in what section of the bookstore will your book be shelved ? pubtip cassandra carr cassandra carr saramegibow how on earth would you market that book ? it makes my brain want to explode pm jan , see cassandra carr 's other tweets twitter ads info and privacy this is how people working in traditional publishing think i'm not saying it 's good or bad it is what it is it reflects the current economic reality of book publishing publishers , in order to know how to promote a book , need to know what category it fits into booksellers , in order to know what shelf to put your book on , need to know the same thing put yourself in their positions for a moment so that you know what their problem is you 've just written a dystopian time travel romance set partly in the past and partly in the future quick what shelf does your book go on ? is it sci fi ? is it romance ? is it fantasy ? what is it ? if your book cannot be quickly cubbyholed , you wo n't get much attention from literary agents , nor traditional publishers , because can you blame them ? they do n't know what to do with your work their heads will explode what are the popular genres , and how popular are they ? here 's a possible answer , from bookbub the table below shows the categories of books stocked by e book purveyor bookbub along with the number of customers on their various mailing lists pertinent to each genre results are not sorted i simply grabbed the data as is from bookbub 's site category subscribers mysteries , contemporary romance , historical fiction , historical romance , biographies and memoirs , thrillers , cooking , erotic romance , religious and inspirational , women 's fiction , general nonfiction , action and adventure , literary fiction , advice and how to , paranormal romance , fantasy , science fiction , horror , romantic suspense , children 's and middle grade , teen and young adult , new adult and college romance , notice , incidentally , there is no humor category if you 're writing a comedic novel , it sure as hell better also be a romance , or women 's fiction , or action and adventure , or sci fi or whatever , because otherwise bookbub is n't going to know what to do with it note when i looked up certain bestselling humor titles on bookbub , i found they often fell under literary fiction in the best of all possible worlds , good fiction would n't need to fall into neat categories indeed , great fiction often defies categorization how often have you heard the term genre bending ? surely there is room in the literary world for another china mi ville , another thomas pynchon ? the standard answer you get , when you pose the genre bender question to traditional publishing types , is yes , there is room for genre destroying fiction all it has to be is great in other words if what you 've written is good enough , it 'll get published , no matter what it is or is n't we 'd all like to think that 's true i do n't know the degree to which it is maybe that 's something each author has to decide for himself or herself but i think there 's a certain validity to the general advice if whatever you 're writing does n't fit neatly into existing sales and marketing taxonomies , it better be so good , it dares agents and publishers not to champion it because otherwise , it 'll get slapped down that much , we know