your smart watch will broadcast your sexual activity , so maybe take it off before going to bed ? in the future , your insurance company will know when you re having sex fusion net terry pratchett advice to booksellers thebookseller com terry pratchett when exxon 's torrance refinery exploded in february , homes two miles away were blanketed with chemical ash containing lanthanum and cerium the exxonmobil explosion that nobody is talking about thinkprogress org if it was true that lower taxes for the rich and more wealth for the wealthy led to job creation , today we would be drowning in jobs the percent are parasites debunking the lies about free enterprise , trickle down , capitalism and celebrity entrepreneurs salon com short covering will continue to power the dollar higher , says imf economist stephen jen , who predicts a advance in the next three months to cents per euro american doctors are killing themselves and no one is talking about it thedailybeast com sen tom cotton r ar suggests war with iran would be a breeze thinkprogress org sadly , removing idiots like this from congress is not such a breeze seeing everyone else 's highlight reels how facebook usage is linked to depressive symptoms journal of social and clinical psychology , vol , no , , pp why the percent keeps losing commondreams org u s now ranks th of nations in electoral integrity , dropping from th place previously read the complete study for details crappiest clickbait news fail of the week award this week goes to mashable , for its landmark story in a perfect world , you 'll be able to pick the toppings on your emoji pizza and you thought journalism was dead ! tired of lies and half truths about mental illness ? arm yourself with some facts check out my free book mental health myths debunked tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , suicide , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data , so you can weigh the evidence for yourself the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth ect is dangerous and consent forms are based on obsolete data but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend i want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on twitter my advice ? follow these guys they retweet ! have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression