in typically tepid , too little too late style , hillary has proposed a tax credit for businesses that hire apprentices bloomberg com , a measure guaranteed to accelerate not stem the ongoing crapification of american jobs does ms clinton not get the idea that people need real , full time , benefits paid , non poverty wage jobs , in massive numbers ? is this her jobs program ? apprentice nation ? really ? insert trump joke here ! new aap figures show e book growth mostly flat digitalbookworld com walmart is hiding billion in offshore tax havens bloomberg com walmart 's other black mark phnompenhpost com cambodian workers producing garments for global retail giant walmart say they are subjected to a slew of workplace abuses ranging from forced labour to sexual harassment programmed to kill u s navy 's unmanned x b rise of robotic killing machines has a cautious world talking sfgate com drones , not droids , will do the killing , without human oversight , in some cases mt everest could be ice free by end of century iflscience com sanders has , donors politicususa com and the koch brothers have every reason to be afraid republican conservative base shrinks gallup com the percentage of republicans and republican leaning independents who describe themselves as both social and economic conservatives has dropped to , the lowest level gallup has measured since why the warren buffett economy 's days are numbered davidstockmanscontracorner com read part of david stockman 's series on the u s economy and learn why current unemployment statistics are pure nonsense world bank urges fed inaction finance yahoo com we at the world bank have just switched on the seat belt sign world bank joins imf in urging fed not to act apparently the qe bubble world economy is a precious delicate snowflake that ca n't withstand even a basis point fed rate hike imf says inequality is hurting growth , calls for wealth redistribution ibtimes com the full study pdf is here high and sustained levels of inequality , especially inequality of opportunity , can entail large social costs ironically , the same international monetary fund that has called so many times for cuts in social programs in greece is now saying income should be redistributed historic bond move is upon us cnbc com yields rise as worldwide selloff continues the inevitable recoil response to years of wanton qe chinese hack got crown jewels politico com intelligence sources compromised what is code ? bloomberg com an extremely longwinded post , at , words , but a good read college textbooks are absurdly expensive for no good reason americablog com hagoromo fulltouch chalk is going out of business chalk fanatics are panicking why mathematicians are hoarding this special type of japanese chalk gizmodo com might i suggest looking into a soft pastel by sennelier instead ? around a stick , but oh so worth it why congress should not cut funding to the social sciences wapo join us here every friday for freakonomic news of the weird and workish ! share the link , please ! have you checked out my free book mental health myths debunked ? tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more documented , with links to sources and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend retweet this post ! many thanks to the great folks who retweeted me yesterday have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression