only million people have ever done or more posts on google hard numbers for public posting activity on google plus stonetemple com various stats show google to be , far and away , the biggest social network no one ever uses but it lives on , because google meanwhile , neuroscience shows there are many reasons we keep returning to facebook the secret psychology of facebook why we like , share , comment and keep coming back blog bufferapp com americans are spending billion a year to subsidize mcdonald s and wal mart s low wage workers wahsingtonpost com ken jacobs , chair of the uc berkeley center for labor research and education , writes about the fact that in the u s , most social program spending goes to people who already work for a living minimum wage is thus corporate welfare , plain and simple warren buffett , meanwhile , says raising the minimum wage will hurt the poor bloomberg com and also war is peace , freedom is slavery , ignorance is strength by the way , that magical , mythical world in which mcdonald 's pays workers an hour ? it 's called australia foxconn buildings are surrounded by netting to prevent suicide at apple 's foxconn sweatshop supply facility in shenzhen , china , suicides totalling in years seem to have subsided now that buildings have been completely surrounded by netting to keep workers from jumping to their deaths apparently the netting is a cost effective alternative to , say , paying people more , or providing more humane work conditions where apple products are born a rare glimpse inside foxconn s factory gates recode net in vote , us senate says climate change not caused by humans bangordailynews com i feel so reassured now do n't you ? in wisconsin , a bill to prevent food stamp recipients from buying shellfish thinkprogress com what 's with this creepy punish the poor fetish lately ? reasons why i ve got nothing to hide is the wrong response to mass surveillance amnesty org one nation , under guard nytimes com when a rising tide sinks most boats jacobinmag com why are us special operations forces deployed in over countries ? thenation com in addition to well known military bases around the world , the u s has around , special operations badged personnel in to countries at any one time tired of lies and half truths about mental illness ? arm yourself with some facts check out my free book mental health myths debunked tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , suicide , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data , so you can weigh the evidence for yourself the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth ect is dangerous and consent forms are based on obsolete data but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend i want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on twitter my advice ? follow these guys they retweet ! have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression