president obama 's kickoff of the brain initiative was a major news item the other day widely lauded as the kind of program that can keep america at the forefront of science , brain research through advancing innovative neurotechnologies or , if you prefer , big ridiculous acronyms inspired by nonsense was compared to the apollo moon program , which gave us cat scans the president said and to the human genome project , which altered economic reality as we know it by creating in return for every dollar invested the president hailed brain as a bold new research effort to revolutionize our understanding of the human mind and uncover new ways to treat , prevent , and cure brain disorders like alzheimer s , schizophrenia , autism , epilepsy , and traumatic brain injury and for all this great knowledge , we 're going to pay just million first year imagine for just million , we 're going to find new ways to treat and cure schizophrenia , autism , epilepsy , traumatic brain injury , and oh yeah , i almost forgot alzheimer 's when i first heard the president mention the million figure , i could n't help thinking of dr evil 's demand for money in austin powers international man of mystery dr evil shit oh hell , let 's just do what we always do hijack some nuclear weapons and hold the world hostage yeah ? good ! gentlemen , it has come to my attention that a breakaway russian republic called kreplachistan will be transferring a nuclear warhead to the united nations in a few days here 's the plan we get the warhead and we hold the world ransom for one million dollars ! number two do n't you think we should ask for more than a million dollars ? a million dollars is n't exactly a lot of money these days virtucon alone makes over billion dollars a year ! dr evil really ? that 's a lot of money did no one tell mr obama , prior to the brain press conference , that the national institutes of mental health already spends billion a year , of which billion goes to research ? does obama not realize that the pharmaceutical industry spends billion a year on research and development , much of it on brain research ? did no one bother to tell mr president that between government and the pharma industry , there 's been well over a trillion dollars spent on brain research in the last years , and we 're still not even close to understanding much less curing schizophrenia , autism , epilepsy , etc ? is our president not aware that the u s government spending another million on brain research is like bill gates giving another fifty bucks to ronald mcdonald house ? tomorrow , i want to talk , in depth , about an example of what real world brain research conducted with federal funding costs i'm going to talk about the star d study , the most extensive and expensive single study ever conducted on the treatment of depression