i 've done a number of posts on biological topics over the past three years here these are a few of them the primordial nature of phage genes virus genes do n't always come from the host a virus with a metabolic gene a virus , a worm , and a louse walk into a bar viral abduction of proteins nucleus like viruses and their enzymes a surprise in an algal virus how quickly did life arise on earth ? why do some bacteria have gc rich dna ? bacteria in hail stones a catalase conundrum strict anaerobes that produce catalase genes , codons , and purines are some leprosy pseudogenes turned on ? a stroll on the beach in , , , b c the ggagg reflex are overapping genes real ? how antisense genes are discovered bidirectionally overlapping genes codons and reverse complement codons the pathogen 's playbook coming to grips with pseudogenes pseudogenes are not junk dna whooping cough genomics the most deadly pathogen of all time are dead genes still alive in the leprosy bacillus ? why do so many codons begin with a purine ? a binary signal in the second codon base the first base in a codon is usually a purine frameshift errors in leprosy bacterium dna why so many helicases ? a different approach to anti aging thermometer genes how do bacteria survive radiation damage ? march of the microbes a manganese catalase fusion protein the other catalase odd structures in a prophage genome a gene heatmap a large genome with lots of structure not all organisms use amino acids the same ways comparative genomics using the canvas api why mitochondrial dna is different more about mitochondrial dna strand asymmetry in mitochondrial dna highly expressed genes better repaired ? dna strand asymmetry more surprises do it yourself phylogenetic trees shedding light on dna strand asymmetry dna repair an evolutionary debate that misses the point shannon entropy and dna chiggers , scrub tyhpus , and pseudogenes looking for luca which direction does the gene point ? the pseudogene hall of fame more secrets of the virus world virus genes do n't come from host genes evolution of prophage genes evolution of viral genes vs host genes how to build your own phylo trees with mega where do virus genes come from ? anaerobic catalases and codon pseudodegeneracy problems with the tuberculosis genome making sense of antisense the hypothetical protein problem a javascript tip for biohackers ancient drug resistance genes fixing the genome annotation nightmare biology 's dirty little secret a tale of nematodes , scarabs , germs , and genes a strange codon symmetry a tale of two microbes deep sea vents the mosquito connection almost all of these posts relate to microbial genetics and or bioinformatics i 've also written biological articles for bigthink , which can be seen here