futurist says today s children will need to work until the age of at different jobs wapo in the u s , men earn less today than in blogs wsj com , inflation adjusted politicians , please discuss is it time to nationalize pharmaceutical companies ? mikethemadbiologist com why do we allow these assholes to price gouge the sick and dying ? why are n't normal profit ratios sufficient ? see also http susiemadrak com nationalize the drug companies austerity leads to rise in european suicides sciencedaily com in the th century , there was no facebook there were friend books mentalfloss com the album amicorum of michael van meer , collected between and it contained entries image credit wikimedia commons public domain is there a valid way to calculate the age of your heart ? articles mercola com the calculator is actually here , but read the article for great tips on how to judge heart health more americans have died by gunshot in the last years than have died in all u s wars since motherjones com , mostly by suicide , a fact seldom mentioned in articles of this kind naked capitalism the rise and fall of online porn economist com i love this sentence there is also much excitement about 'teledildonics' remote control technologies that allow people thousands of miles apart to control each other s gadgets is it too late to become a teledildonics magnate ? i want the business card , at least ever wonder which animals kill the most humans ? view image on twitter molly kelly , md drmollykelly wow pm feb , people are talking about this twitter ads info and privacy why is infant mortality so high in the u s ? nber org poor access to health care duh paying ceos fat bonuses for stock performance does n't work cornell study finance yahoo com dept says cop followed procedure when he mistook a yo man s stroke for dui and beat him alternet org of course ! what else are you supposed to do ? in the uk , medical practices offered incentives to cut urgent referrals pulsetoday co uk a third of cactuses are at risk of extinction businessinsider com driving makes us dumb , sick , and lonely qz com yeah duh sneeze third quarter investor flight wiped record trillion off global stocks reuters com according to bank of america ml a tidal wave feet high nature com the largest tsunami ever recorded happened , years ago bitcoin and beyond nature com what will it take to build a better bitcoin ? fear not people are working on it a big thank you to all the great people who retweeted me yesterday buy my books or click to find out more , at least have you added your name to our mailing list ? thank you be well