admit it you want to learn to program but it 's too scary right ? wrong you are now about to write your first line of code and by tradition see , this is one of those lore things you have to learn , your first program must write the time honored message hello world ! to an ouput device of some kind a printer , a monitor , a piece of bread , whatever in this case , the browser so , just to the right , in the sidebar there ? do you see the text area where it says try some javascript ? look just to the right in that first box , please now go ahead and type or copy paste the following alert hello world ! then click the evaluate button go ahead i 'll wait when you clicked evaluate , a small dialog more of a monolog appeared onscreen containing the text hello world ! , because you told the javascript runtime the part of the browser that runs javascript code to invoke the built in alert function that , by convention , is available on the window object , in every browser that supports javascript that was n't so scary , right ? note javascript has many built in always available objects see them here one of the built in objects is the date object you might try entering the following code in the text box new date if you click evaluate , the second text box will show the result of the evaluation on my computer , right now , it shows fri mar gmt eastern standard time try multiplying the date by one new date you 'll get a big long number like this is the number of milliseconds since jan , of course , javascript can do math for you see if you can guess what the following expression will produce this code says one divided by two times five but does that mean one over two , times five , or does it mean one over two times five ? there 's only one way to find out evaluate it means one half , times , right ? if you wanted one over two times five , you have to write the parens will keep things straight try it one more quick code example are n't you excited ? you 're writing code ! try evaluating the following window scrollby , the result of the evaluation is undefined , but what you should have noticed is that the browser window jumped scrolled downward by pixels the instant you clicked the evaluate button question how would you scroll upward , to the top of the page ? you may have guessed that the two numeric arguments to the scrollby function represent horizontal and vertical scrolling amounts , in pixels you saw that supplying as the second argument caused a downward scroll therefore , supplying a negative number should cause an upward scroll , right ? but how many pixels is it to the top of the screen ? we do n't know we do n't care try entering a really large negative number window scrollby , this time , clicking evaluate scrolls you right to the top of the screen this is an illustration of hackery we did n't know the right number to use , to get to the top of the screen , so as a hack , we tried an absurdly large negative number we did n't have any idea whether using a large negative number might break the browser or cause some kind of javascript error , so in the spirit of hackery we simply tried it and it worked it got the job done , without breaking anything no errors no one got hurt we scrolled to the top of the page congratulations you hacker , you the following list of people who retweeted me yesterday might not be complete , but it 's as good as i can do with my silly notifications scraping hack in any case , you should get busy following the folks shown below they 're fantastic twitter networkers , and they retweet ! click their pictures the pics are live links have you added your name to our mailing list ? what the heck are you waiting for , a personal invitation from thetweetofgod ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression