twitter appears to be having an outage as of am eastern u s on good friday or twitter analyics is broken or both or neither we do n't know since there is n't a reliable way to audit what 's happening is marijuana cultivation accelerating the california drought and killing off salmon needlessly ? this plos one paper pretty clearly says yes fiorina 's presidential plan to save the economy stop lazy workers from watching porn all day long and she just called tim cook a hypocrite just what the gop needs , right ? another braying jackass this chart from the heritage foundation shows that almost half of americans pay no income tax many are children , of course but wait , corporations are people , too , right ? turns out they do n't bear much of the tax burden the corporate tax share was as a percentage of profits , corporate taxes are at an all time low be sure to see taxes on corporate profits low , falling for decades , and now close to a voluntary tax blogging is dead , right ? not so fast learn how harry reid leveraged bloggers to keep social security from being privatized david weigel at bloomberg com the women of isis yeah , they join yeah , from the uk , and the us in most states , you pay to be arrested , pay for a public defender , and pay for your own probation in some , you emerge from jail owing room and board or are billed for a jury trial fail to pay the fees ? go to jail yes , debtor 's prison exists in america nytimes note link is to the cached version of the story , in case you 've used up your allotment of free nyt pieces for the month you 're welcome you can work from home now and have almost anything delivered , so why leave the comfort of your safety cocoon , ever ? the shut in economy by lauren smiley medium i think it s amazing that kentucky has finally joined the st century and allowed for some real solid evidence based interventions that will help to combat this epidemic kentucky 's new heroin law marks a 'culture shift' huffpost supreme court justices blast the corrections system thinkprogress org we send teachers to prison for rigging the numbers , why not bankers ? http neweconomicperspectives org i want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on twitter my advice ? follow these guys they retweet ! have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression