not long ago april , mike cooper tried to calculate the average amount of royalties earned per year by self publishers of novels , and he came up with the appallingly low but probably accurate figure of why so low ? well , there 's a tremendous oversupply of titles , for one thing with around million titles available growing by or more a year , you ca n't expect that the average book will be terribly lucrative but there 's also the fact that most novels are not particularly well written to put it kindly let 's be blunt most self published novels and a large percentage of traditionally published ones are irredeemable junk and thanks to the dunning kruger effect , most authors of said novels do n't have any idea how bad their work is does the world need another self published novel ? inexperienced novelists greatly underestimate the difficulty of achieving what i would call structural soundness in a story , which is why i recommended in a previous post that novelists try writing the screenplay version of their work first screenplays are highly structured read this great series of posts , make extensive use of dialog , and require visual thinking all of which can help any novelist most would be novelists fall far short of understanding what it takes to make a story compelling screenwriter matt bird provides a thoughtful and comprehensive checklist of the most important story elements in this magnificent post he suggests around things that can make a story better , all of them worth considering most novelists seem painfully oblivious to the majority of these considerations but a lot of novels fail on a more basic level , the level of ordinary diction the failures take many forms i looked at a novel the other day in which the first paragraph of chapter one contained instances of it or its the writing was nowhere near skilled enough to sustain that many instances of it in another book i saw instances of he his him on a single page of around words e book it was like the main character did n't have a name his name was he triteness is rampant i 've lost count of how many times i 've seen the phrase untimely death , for example all deaths are untimely by default , are they not ? untimely is arch , trite , and unnecessary speaking of arch , many british writers seem unaware of or perhaps indifferent to the fact that americans have n't used whilst in conversation for nearly years probably the two most reliable tipoffs that you 're reading the work of an unskilled amateur are overuse of adverbs , and use of a verb other than said to carry dialog in violation of leonard 's third law a truly unskilled amateur manages to combine both abuses i 'd like to see more of you , he murmured suggestively are adverbs always bad ? no , of course not but they 're usually a tell an opportunity to go back and show they qualify as overdescription in case you did n't know , narrative description once an honored wmd in the novelist 's arsenal is now pass do n't take my word for it read some recent books by literary agent donald maass , among others adverbs are cheap bolt ons they have no cash value let me show you what a heartless fussbuster or more colloquially an asshole i am when it comes to evaluating fiction two days ago , i came across the following sentence in a novel as a large stone building loomed over him , a strange high pitched noise , rather musical and not very far carrying , stopped him dead in his tracks loomed sounds hackneyed to me , but that 's the least of our problems here i have no idea what makes the noise in this passage strange i can imagine a high pitched noise , but in what way is it strange ? it 's strange because you tell me it is ? suppose i want to figure that out on my own rather musical and not very far carrying is abysmal what does rather musical mean ? you just told me it 's strange now it 's musical ? why rather ? not very far carrying is amateur sounding the word very is usually weak , by the way is it critical to the story that this strange yet rather musical sound is not far carrying ? why bring it up , then ? stopped him dead in his tracks only an amateur uses trite expressions like dead in his tracks here 's more from the same novel he listened intently , his eyes straining to see through the fog all was silent for a second and then he jumped suddenly as a sound of huge wings thrashed toward him he stepped back and stumbled slightly and then there was silence again hastily , he made for the front door , lifted the latch and stepped quickly into a small vestibule he wiped his feet on the worn mat and glanced down the corridor lots of problems here , starting with four he sentences in a row he did this he did that he did this eight occurrences of he his him in four sentences the semicolon is n't needed they never are use a period he listened intently as opposed to what ? listening carelessly ? get rid of adverbs his eyes straining to see through the fog has nothing to do with listening , does it ? so why are they in the same sentence ? he jumped suddenly is there another way to jump ? again get rid of adverbs personally , i do n't like the idea of a sound thrashing toward someone read what it says it says a sound of huge wings thrashed does a sound thrash ? i'm confused did a bird accost our hero ? a bat ? there 's no mention of an animal hastily , he made for the door maybe in england people still make for doors i do n't know hastily , i can do without get rid of adverbs there 's no fixing this type of writing by swapping out a word here or there as the foundry people say , time to melt and repour unfortunately , most novels are like this i'm surprised anyone can stand to read such dreck but then , as mike cooper found see link at the beginning , most people are n't reading it frankly , it 's a wonder the average novel even makes i think cooper 's calculations are generous