imagine there 's no euro it 's easy if you try this is nuts trillion of government bonds now have negative yields davidstockmanscontracorner com , by david stockman remember him ? director of the omb under reagan ? , is a scary read it gets even scarier , though in is mario draghi stupid , crooked or what ? stockman says flat out so , yes , the euro and the eurozone do not have a prayer of surviving inside marissa mayer 's plan to take on google businessinsider com is just as embarrassing as it sounds can mayer possibly be that stupid and naive ? the answer , apparently , is yes , and then some but remember where she came from google , a culture of almost inconceivable arrogance is there some reason , other than greed , why pharma companies in the u s charge so damn much for an epi pen ? spoiler alert the answer turns out to be no sticker shock how big pharma gouges the american public billmoyers com income inequality map dark areas more unequal income inequality is a predictor of poor life expectancy nytimes com also , unemployment is a factor in one out of five suicides reverbpress com it remains astonishing how many pilots with mild or fading depressive disorders taking antidepressants flew without the knowledge of flight doctors and still fly for us , dr uwe st ben and dr j rgen kriebel , who both worked for lufthansa , wrote in the abstract of a paper published in while mr lubitz was still a trainee germanwings crash exposes history of denial on risk of pilot suicide nytimes com how nsa pulls off quantum insert attacks wired com a clever take on the time honored man in the middle attack works sometimes polite golf clap dutch launch criminal investigation into uber reuters com apparently , it 's not so easy getting uber out of your country mindfulness based cognitive behavioral therapy turns out to be every bit as shitty as antidepressant therapy , with vs relapse rates this according to a punishingly vapid paper in the lancet with coauthors how proud their mothers must be crappiest clickbait story of the week award goes to mashable for my brother looks like harry styles and it 's killing my wildest fantasies , which somehow got k social shares despite a creepy , indecipherable weirdness that puts it in a genre of its own tired of lies and half truths about mental illness ? arm yourself with some facts check out my free book mental health myths debunked tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , suicide , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data , so you can weigh the evidence for yourself the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth ect is flat out dangerous consent forms are based on obsolete data but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend i want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on twitter my advice ? follow these guys they retweet ! have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression