in the richest nation on earth , a third of children live in poverty shadowproof com shameful study identifies new eating disorder in men takepart com protein powder abuse may become a new apa diagnosis aphantasia a life without mental images bbc com take the aphantasia test the emotions that make us more creative hbr org antidepressant drug trials are not generalizable sciencedaily com inclusion exclusion criteria for antidpressant trials have narrowed over the past five years so that the most typical patients are excluded , rendering results moot facebook should pay all of us newyorker com jaron lanier made this argument a couple years ago it 's still valid today google , fb , yahoo , bing , etc profit massively from the expropriation of personal data nitrous oxide emissions from fertilizer used to grow corn have been vastly underestimated , it turns out is financial success genetic ? ineteconomics org of course not , but the tendency is to treat everything that gets handed down in families as genetic until proven otherwise how the midwest 's corn farms are cooking the planet motherjones com and btw , with oil so cheap , do we really need all that corn ethanol in our fuel now ? could n't we , like , feed the planet with it or something ? class war and the lessons of history davidbrin blogspot com the last thing the new oligarchs want you to do is study history the dark side of big data a link roundup mathbabe org mathbabe rocks check out her blog the great emerging market bubble project syndicate org , in which bill emmott , former editor in chief of the economist , identifies weak political institutions as the main culprit behind economic stagnation in a similar vein , see the antidote to economic anxiety is better government america aljazeera com where 's the republican outrage over saudi arabia ? fpif org apparently , only donald trump questions the relationship with our longtime friends , the saudis and it 's by no means clear he does so for the right reasons yep , , bankruptcy filings this year creditslips org but that 's actually good news , because bankruptcy filings , at per , americans , are at a year low bernie sanders shows how to do a page https berniesanders com join us here every friday for all the freakonomic links you may have missed ! tell a friend have you checked out my free book mental health myths debunked ? tons of info , tons of live links , lots of straight talk about depression , meds , therapy , psychiatry , mental health trends , statistics , and more documented , with links to sources and you know me , i call bullshit on bogus ideas then give urls to the actual data the idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything ? myth most people benefit from antidepressants ? myth antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials ? largely myth half the trials show separation half do n't electroshock therapy is safe and effective ? bigtime myth but do n't take my word for it read the science for yourself it 's all laid out with references in the book download epub or pdf now at noisetrade tell a friend retweet this post ! it is with great gratitude that i salute the great folks who retweeted me yesterday have you added your name to our mailing list ? also please visit hackyourdepression com when you have a chance , and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression