captain melancholy cm what 's with these dying trees ? i see them being sold everywhere , people haul these things home to watch them die , to watch their needles brown while they turn into a first class fire hazard dale carnegie dc it 's not about trees dying , it 's a celebration of the evergreen as a symbol of the sun returning from its journey on the winter solstice cm who asked him to return ? has n't he heard of global warming ? have al gore give old sol a clue dc global warming is not the fault of the sun , it 's a sign of industrial progress progress , progress , progress is what it 's all about think positive ! cm and if i put all my retirement money into a coastal florida shack ? dc think of the joy of rebuilding ! cm i think without the sun there would be no global warming ergo cancel christmas and construct some giant parasols in space i love space so dark and lifeless , so hopeless , so final i want to be buried in space dc if you take my sales course you might bve able to afford it someday cm ha ! do you know how much they pay me just to stay away from the inaugural ball ? it 's depression protection money i'm not the mob , but i collect my due , even from the mob look at tony soprano and i 've gone easy on him dc eek ! what 's that look in your eyes ? cm just your death , how do you like it ? dc i hope i do n't see you later cm then pay up , dude , or i 'll shit on your dreams that 's better you can go back now to your imaginary world of happiness , full well knowing you have to pay protection money to preserve your illusion dc i 'll send norman vincent peale and tony robbins after you ! cm two more of my paying clients where have you been ? dc the best things in life are free ! cm like depression you want some ? dc help ! i'm out of here ! cm chicken i want to sing i'm dreaming of a black christmas just like a mental hospital where the patients shuffle and nurses bustle to give us all our latest dose i'm dreaming of a black christmas with every christmas card i burn may your days be sorry and sad and may all your christmases be bad i hope this finds you in good cheer so i can ruin it depressively yours , captain melancholy kilorats