first , good news after intolerable wrestling with the technical difficulties of converting an old video into something that can be uploaded to you tube , i finally succeeded click on the title to see dr c and the stratocats play his composition , what will you do ? the video was produced by my brother , chris chaffin , who also plays drums i sing and play lead guitar charlie rowe plays bass and his brother , dave rowe plays rhythm guitar there is also a second drummer , dave rodig and you can see my daughters and friends dancing , including my late daughter , rachel , the tall , slim redhead now for the next installment of positively bud thirsty but ca n't sleep god this place gets cold at night never thought it would be so cold shirt back on no pillow what is the point how i would like a drink of water but what is the point if i call out why would anyone answer ? i am being punished because i could n't say my room was terrific with conviction what if i ca n't ask for help like i mean it ? why would they give it to me ? better just to doze , dream floor too hard back aches turn to side hip pointer curl up in corner for warmth better thirst and aches better than tears of a vacuum get through the night through the night all is night , night has fallen can barely move pissed in the corner earlier do n't mind the smell if i have to shit , so what ? my smell my waste waste from a waste that 's funny case of wasted space do n't deserve the oxygen that keeps me alive ca n't stop breathing without a rope give me a rope long enough to hang myself and i could move the world what if i call out ? no one on duty why bother ? maybe tomorrow do they mean to kill me ? that 's a blessing but martha knows i'm here they 'll save me first what do they want ? hey , nick hey , larry did our little bird stir last night ? not a peep , my man hard case yeah , i feel sorry for him you know that 's the worst thing you can do , do n't you ? i know the protocol , larry , i 'd never say it to him , but for a man to get in that state so depressed and helpless that he wo n't even cry out for water oh , i think he will when ? sometime this afternoon when his thirst gets worse than his depression i hope so , but he 's a tough case that 's why he 's here bud woke to the dim light latticing the floor but noticed he had stopped shivering must be day he felt an urge to crap but suppressed it he got up and stretched , tested the temperature of the corrugated ceiling , then paced his tongue felt like a large , dry pickle his throat felt raw as a scab the day wore on he huddled in the corner of the giant oven he had peed once no tears not even saliva left to swallow was he dehydrated ? he pinched his forearm and watched the skin tent up for a minute before returning to flat he felt as if the dentist 's blower had been in his mouth all night larry looked at his watch l pm bud better vocalize his needs soon or they were going to have to get him out where was his survival instinct ? bud bellied over to the grate to look at the floor outside he did n't recognize any human shadows or chair legs , had no way of knowing if anyone was near , heard no footsteps or voices for all he knew he had been abandoned perhaps if he banged on the door a little no response fingernails across grate nothing larry smiled as he heard the raps and scratchings but he waited , as instructed , for a more concrete expression of need adults could talk , after all hello ? bud croaked is anybody out there ? larry did n't answer question did not address patient 's need hello ! bud croaked louder can somebody help me ? he rattled the aluminum walls like thunder larry ignored the plea request too general i'm thirsty ! please give me something to drink ! bud said in a sandpaper voice larry smiled , put his magazine down and approached the slot with a glass of slightly warm water here , bud , he said , why did n't you ask sooner ? bud greedily took the water without comment he put the glass back through the slot may i have another ? he asked how was the water ? larry replied bud paused for a minute , then said , it was terrific ! good , larry said , and gave him a glass of cooler water and how was that ? wonderful , thank you , bud said the colloquy continued for six glasses of water the last one had ice and bud called it heavenly would you like any more ? larry asked not right now , but thank you all the same would you like to talk to troy ? bud thought a minute yes that would be terrific , thank you ! good , i 'll send him down the relief of his thirst was so palpable that bud forgot his depression for the moment by the time troy arrived he was over his brief nausea from drinking so fast and had just begun to feel hunger troy pulled his chair up to the door to better hear through the grate how are you today , bud ? i feel terrific ! he said , hoping that the modulation in his voice imitated the proper feeling good , good , troy said soothingly and how do you like your new room ? hot stifling no bathroom freezing at night the room is great ! bud said with all the enthusiasm he could muster tell me what 's great about it well , to begin with , it 's an efficient use of space and ? and it 's designed so one can experience the real outside weather instead of the false air conditioned comfort of my previous room you have something against air conditioned comfort ? oh no , not at all i only meant to say that the exposure to more natural weather was invigorating do you mean to imply that a controlled indoor climate is unhealthy ? troy asked not at all , not at all , i was only celebrating the difference do you have a preference ? bud froze to prefer one thing over another might be perceived as a veiled criticism but to have no preferences was unacceptably passive in this climate i really prefer air conditioning , he said with forced nonchalance because ? because i find it more comfortable troy winced are you implying you find your present room uncomfortable ? oh no , not at all , it 's quite comfortable i just think the air conditioned part of the building is a little more comfortable good , troy said would you like to come out and change rooms again ? i would dearly love to return to my previous room , bud said , and would be most grateful if you would permit it troy unlocked the door bud rose slowly and squinted at the harsh light and shiny white walls and floor troy led him back to his room and said , why do n't you shower and shave and then come down to the mess hall afterward ? just follow the signs see you there