hey , blogees i fired our lawyer wednesday and hired some lawyers with juice one is the brother of the mayor , one has a grandfather on the supreme court and a nephew in congress i do n't know which of these politicos i'm supposed to pay but i think it 's the nephew in congress since he controls funding to the local ministries anyway , the mayor 's brother marched me into the da 's office wednesday , and as he had some goods on him , the man immediately called his subordinates to get our damn case to a judge then in mexico one never knows if such things are theater to save face or actually happening but it felt good ! on wednesday derek also had to make a statment about the supposed break in the public attroney and our attorney before i fired her both advised him to say nothing you can take the th in mexico , too so the authorities badgered him for two hours and he stuck to his guns , god bless him my lawyer told me to say nothing , he kept saying , as they prodded him with questions , unable to believe that 's exactly what he 'd do funnier was my forty minute session with the chief adminstrator of the ministerio publico i brought placards in spanish declaring , no justice for americans in mexico , and , the government knows the name and address of our dog 's kidnapper but has n't done a thing ! into the entrance hall i sat there as all the bureaucrats passed and read the signs the administrator was soon summoned , and summoned me upstairs , obviously flummoxed by my action it just is n't done , he said it 's not our fault , we 're just trying to help you we 're just a small part of the process and i but you are part of the government , are n't you ? and does n't mexico have free speech ? are you going to arrest me ? you do n't understand it 's just not done here , it wo n't help if it wo n't help how come i'm getting all this personal attention from your honor ? i'm trying to explain how it is that i ca n't do it ? not exactly , but there may be a federal law forbidding non citizens from protesting publicly really ? so the federales are coming after me and my butt 's going to rot in jail ? i did n't say that you got kids ? yes if ten weeks passed after one were kidnapped and nothing was done , how would you feel ? that 's not the same ! we 're talking about a pet here ! no , were talking about a service dog , which mexicans do n't understand , as they treat their dogs like furry alarm clocks what ? guard dogs , underfed and full of worms you do worm your kids , do n't you ? huh ? btw , is the public lawyer here to talk with me as we arranged ? no , he had to leave on an emergency right mexico is full of emergencies ok , why did n't you tell me instead of wasting forty minutes of my time i'm a doctor , i 'll send you my bill and with that i left the king of dead end thinking confused , wondering why gringos are so crazy i did something no one had done before and no one is likely to do again but ah , the pleasure of it how i enjoyed my socratic ignorance he could never wrap his brain around mine , poor concrete thinking culturally rigid unimaginative kafkaesque functionary ! all for today , ce