i wrote a poem , despite my recent aridity i do n't know what to make of it , but here it is at least my beard reflected in the glass door of the library salt and dandelions , the white fuzz i never thought i 'd get this old youth cannot imagine mortality 's attrition in its dr pepper commercial the gum is always fresh and everyone 's a virgin still , the greater part of life is dimunition from to it 's downhill the body knows but the mind may not face it until if then you accept your growing impotence and avoid an angry showdown with your pride you might age gracefully at least try not to be ridiculous like the man with the ill fitting toupee worthy of its own hunting season positively bud installment how about your mother ? troy continued she was sick a lot with headaches , you know she never seemed very happy always going to doctors you were afraid to ask her for help because she seemed sick and frail , yet she outlived my dad i ca n't remember her laughing did she cook for you ? yes did she wash your clothes , mend them , and keep house ? to the best of her ability so your poor frail mother with her chronic headaches nevertheless loved you enough to overcome her illness for your sake and cook and clean and do the wash ? well , i guess so either she did or she did n't she did then she must have loved you very much your mother loved you but it does n't feel that way why ? because i was afraid to ask her for things , afraid to be a burden to her it was like an unspoken rule that she was exhausted , on her last legs so to speak , and we were not to upset her so what ? she had limitations , but she loved you the best she could your mother loved you say it ! my mother loved me again ! my mother loved me how much ? a lot enough that she consistently overcame her own frailties to take care of you she loved you a lot say it ! my mother loved me a lot ! how does that feel ? good how does that feel ? terrific repeat after me 'i am special because i am unique i am lucky because my father and mother loved me bud did so , and the strange sensation of a visceral optimism came over him again great ! said troy that 's enough for this morning 's session before this afternoon i want you to write , fifty times each , 'i am special because i am unique my father dearly loved me my mother dearly loved me and i love myself ' ok ? sure , bud answered , his voice betraying a nascent enthusiasm larry entered the room on cue next on the agenda , my man , is some interpretive art therapy follow me they wound their way through several corridors until they entered a large rectangular room wallpapered in daisies whose long blue tables were strewn with magazines , posters and pictures , whole and in pieces a cheerful , matronly woman with a gray bun stood at the head of the room several patients were thumbing through pictures at tables , intent on their work i 'll leave you here for now , larry said and left hello , mr rose may i call you bud ? why , yes , he replied the therapist looked like an overstuffed and graying mary poppins , silver reading glasses perched on her upturned nose , with a variety of brown and red moles on her neck which bud thought could pass for art i understand you 're new to our program , so i'm going to give you a little individual attention this morning please join me at my desk she motioned him over to the head of the room and sat across from him with an indulgent smile what we do here is try to change your basic interpretation of reality , she said we begin with pictures you tell me what you see and feel , and then i 'll explore with you some alternate ways of seeing , ok ? sure , bud said while the singsong mantra played through his mind i am unique , unique , unique , my father loved me , my mother loved me , i am unique , unique , unique here 's the first picture she slid a black and white photograph across the desk what do you see ? bud saw a dog , a large tan boxer , freshly run over in the middle of the street a truck was parked at an odd angle just off the curb and a man in a blue uniform , presumably from the truck , was bending over the injured dog i see a tragedy , bud began , a terrible accident the man did n't mean to run the dog over and now he does n't know what to do mrs claiborne clucked you do n't have to see it that way , you know , dear think of it this way a dog with an irresponsible owner who let him run free without a leash was put out of its misery by an accident a caring truck driver ministers to the dog and demonstrates human compassion it is good that the dog died , otherwise he might have suffered more at the owner 's hands and the driver knows perfectly well what to do he 's about to call the pound to pick up the animal the impact was too sudden to be painful the accident will make the truck driver an even better driver , and he 'll have an interesting story to tell his family that night how do you like my version ? you have a wonderful imagination , mrs claiborne hogwash ! i have a limited imagination but i have disciplined myself to put the best possible construction on things in the interest of mental health here 's a second picture the notorious picture of bobby kennedy 's assassination stared up at him what do you see ? mrs claiborne asked a horrible tragedy , bud said the death of a man who brought hope to many at the hands of a fanatic now , now , bud , you 're the one with the good imagination what you see is the last successful assassination attempt on a president or presidential candidate reagan was wounded but survived there has not been another tragedy like this in many years and you know why ? no , why ? precisely because attempts like this one gave rise to greater security precautions for all candidates we have bobby kennedy and sirhan sirhan to thank for our genuine improvement in protecting notables with this next picture i want you to try to see things more our way