i wanted to do something for the poem below was published in small spiral notebook not long after the tragedy i have purposely not revised it in memoriam , ce world trade center kaddish america , your confidence is shaken though patriots say your resolve is steeled , we now know steel melts at degrees in the ground are empty sockets some say the chickens have come home to roost , like malcom x after kennedy 's death some say , forgive , do n't bomb the innocent debris fill the cavities myself , i hated the towers' garish imposition on space but we ca n't always choose our symbols still , i wo n't buy a tee shirt build it and they will come , blow it up and they will die do you hear james earl jones' voice ? he 's the real voice of america verizon local and international what should we put in his mouth now ? be comforted , america , you will not weep forever temper your fervor with grave introspection remember rain falls on the just and the unjust and a rich man rarely enters heaven america , you are not a christian nation for there are no christian nations christ said , my kingdom is not of this world his kingdom was not attacked but how should we respond ? sometimes the hardest thing to do is nothing better nothing than slaughter innocents america , if you must do something , do something audacious if you sin , sin boldly , martin luther said but let the innocents first know , let pamphlets rain from the sky and overwhelm the lie that we are the enemy we come against all isms america are you awake yet ? war is messy , the innocent die america , are you sure you still have the stomach for this ? black woman in white face is this pompeii ? no nothing is preserved what happened to the skyline ? manhattan 's pillars imploded and samson 's hair was jet exhaust the lions still flank the midtown library but offer us no riddles fire has made us one the ash survivors wear contains the victims have mercy , o god someone cut a slice out of the pentagon , black smoke coughs incinerated braids worse is the memory of space no longer occupied , where sudden ghosts are left with nothing real to haunt save vacant air and a pit of debris how many ways are there of not approaching this atrocity , this national violation ? america , you have been put in stocks for all the world to see feel the whip of the turbaned puritans ? maybe nobody cares about us rich americans but even a lion gets hungry i fear for you , saddam i fear for you , iran i fear for you , afghanistan we do not hate your people but a fly makes the perfumer 's ointment stink to succor means complicity and it is hard just to remove the fly savagery grinds the human heart to a flint too dull to spark war makes monsters of good men how much more the evil ones ! good night , lieutenant calley and never presume that people fight for the right cause for the right reason used car salesmen all , buffeted by opinion , suspended between the profit and the loss i have two cars , two computers , two televisions and an ocean view they have clay huts and a copy of the koran i did not get here by accident did they ? i should stop watching tv and read the bible , i suppose , wherein job utters what i greatly feared has come upon me but i am too angry and astonished to concentrate when i took my pakistani friend to a gay pride parade , he said , back home we 'd simply line 'em up and shoot 'em does god bless pakistan , even afghanistan ? of course his rain falls on the just and the unjust i am proud of flight but i ca n't understand the others' timidity box cutters ? with a flotation pillow for a shield and an oxygen cylinder for a club those ignorant fanatics could not have withstood me note to my pakistani friend one hero of flight was gay for whom shall we die ? for you , america ? for god ? for allah ? for country ? how does one die for his country ? is n't that too abstract ? america , you are an ideal and a very imperfect incarnation we can only die for freedom else live in slavery i want to cleanse my mind of television , do a hard disk wipe of talking heads whose earnestly raised brows bring twenty four hour dissection the importance of being earnest america , turn off your televisions grieve with the living for the dead who are more than information , more human than ourselves even , having achieved mortality first , the destiny that most unites us to die for freedom is the ultimate freedom to murder in the name of god is the ultimate slavery it is not about religion , it is about fanaticism as c s lewis wrote , whatever becomes a god becomes a demon i have seen the doll 's eyes of young cultists chanting sacred syllables in the street , invoking angels , posing beatific from a holy brainwashing if you meet the living god i do not think he will ask about the angel of destruction who measures righteousness with an abacus or how many bodies he put to sleep before bedtime in heaven terrorists may be located only with great difficulty in hell 's classifieds i have an iranian barber he cut my father 's hair before mine if i stop by during business hours and the chairs are empty i know he 's praying so i get a magazine and listen to the hummed prayers from the back room he beams when showing me pictures of his grandchildren , dark eyed , dark haired , like him he is a good man i 've scattered the ashes of my parents in the pacific but i knew whose ashes they were the greatest forensic undertaking in history i know we all want relics perfectly understandable in grief but does our obsession with bones too much confirm our materialism ? no mass grave and memorial with a common belief in heaven will ever suffice is there no emperor but the emperor of death 's dream ? yet america is not the great satan islam is not the great satan israel is not the great satan iraq is not the great satan the great satan is an ism as in , my security depends on my trust in an absolute truth to make sense of the world and i will defend it to the death because i cannot face the terror , the terror of doubt true faith requires if america indulged in terrorism we could blow up the moon the effects on earth 's orbit , tides and climate could subsequently be classified as natural no increase in pollutants , just floods , volcanoes , earthquakes , maybe an ice age or two think of how the moon 's absence would alter the skyline and how little credit men and nations receive for what they do n't do