gym talk i exercised today i walked two miles uphill in forty minutes , then i swam yards , staring at blue tiles in crosses underwater no cardiogram was needed , since my pulse behaved itself true , my back ached while swimming and walking but pain is no good measurement of health i slipped into the jacuzzi a man was talking about impeaching bush , as many do clinton s little lies harmed none , he said , while bush , that preening christian cockatoo believes more sacrifice honors the dead honor the living , i say , pull up the tents ! we ve done no good look at the evidence today s sonnet reflects my experience at the gym yesterday , though the events and subsequent conversation have , of course , been manipulated for the sake of brevity but the passion of men my age in the locker room discussion of the present administration was amazing i haven t seen citizens exercised like this in a long time on the other hand , where are the protests ? where is the million man march against the war ? why are there no great demonstrations ? is it simply a matter of scale , that we ve only lost ? or is it because the economy is good , despite the drain iraq puts on the treasury ? or has apathy reached new levels in our society ? do we think , that s just washington as usual and there s nothing we can do about it ? cindy sheehan may be a flake , but she had the right idea but the point is not to throw one dead son in bush s face , rather to throw the whole debacle in his face , preferably with a huge demonstration or a national demonstration coordinated locally , with protests from la to ny but where are the organizers ? if people behaved fifty years ago as they do today , segregation might still exist if anyone knows of any effective movements opposing the war that i might join , please write me i am constantly amazed at the lack of protest over our current fatal misdirection what , we blew up the mideast so we have to stay there and try to put the pieces of the balloon back together ? get a life , america ce