i'm sitting here wondering if anyone has bought my book yet only my publisher knows should i write her or wait for her to write me ? a poetry book does not behave in an arc like a bestseller it has a lower and longer trajectory and a longer shelf life if you do n't believe it , just visit the poetry section in the book store and compare dust levels orders , i expect , will dribble in slowly and hopefully pick up speed to a steady trickle is this pessimistic ? i think it 's realism besides , in this internet printing on demand age , a book can have a very long shelf life writing a book is the easy part selling it is the hard part i often tire of puritan america and perhaps that distaste helped fuel the poem i wrote tonight on this very blog before speculating on book sales here goes unto death when does pleasure turn to slavery ? when does bubble gum become a tasteless mechanism of the mouth ? when do cigarettes take up the whip and chain ? when does alcohol require denial for communion ? tell all your blue nose friends addiction 's rarely fatal go shock them with your habits a house does not collapse from one bad timber a life does not collapse from one bad habit a crab can get by fine on seven legs there is little on this living earth we ca n't make an obsession out of when does pleasure turn to slavery ? when does the staff become a crutch , the crutch a knife ? because denial is incremental like crabgrass in the fescue slowly transforming a lawn until seeds are forgotten and mowing , you settle for green do n't let the jealous judge you there are more important things it 's adversity that makes a man , not what 's in his bloodstream how much whiskey does it take to get through a war ? there 's never enough in the angel of satisfaction lurks the devil of enslavement in the house of stimulation lurks the devil of increase when does pleasure turn to slavery ? when you cannot not do it unto death ? i got to mc an amateur show for our men 's circle tonight it went surprisingly well , no doubt because i was wearing my impresario 's pink and yellow paisley sport coat from the s it 's my most righteous rag , a public eyesore , an assault on all good taste for that reason it garners incredulous attention and ungrudging admiration kilobunny , ce