poetry thursday has called for a poem today from inside someone else 's shoes i once imagined what it would be like to be andy rooney , who strikes me as slightly compulsive , not to mention curmudgeonly , if he smoked some pot while on camera here is the result andy rooney stoned what does 'irregular' mean ? look , here 's one trio of socks for and another labeled 'irregular' for see any difference ? i certainly ca n't let me tear off this packaging , there i 'll put the expensive one on my right foot and the cheap one on my left foot , ok ? whoa my feet look so far away and white are they even alive ? here 's one sock , now the other on can you see any difference ? if you look closely at the line of gold along the toes you might notice how on the cheap pair the threads are not as straight , they re wavier they remind me of wheat fields in the midwest and sometimes you 'd see an eagle but these socks which is which ? who knows ? would you pay three times as much for the one on my right ? or is that from the cheap pair ? i do n't know anymore but the threads , the gold threads on black , are a symbol of strength , like the lion , the lion in the savanna hunting , hunting for the other socks where are they ? i had six pair won t pay my fare why does everyone say i m a whiner ? by the way , if your feet are as ugly as mine you know , blue veined on pale marble with bunions and onychomycosis that is , fungal thickening of the toenails , do n't take your socks off in public see ? you want to look at that ? jesus ! i did n't know my feet had so many colors , the blue , the orange yellow calluses , the sparse white hairs , the pale flesh , waxen maybe hmmmmm look , the sole turns white when you press down on it , see ? no , not white , more yellow while the surrounding sole looks pink , but yellow on the calluses you can tell a lot from people 's feet are feet irregular ? they say the right one is usually longer , but they make shoes the same length what 's that about ? a podiatrists' scam to promote surgery ? jerry , could you turn those lights down ? they 're much too bright where are my tinted glasses ? there notice how my ears are irregular ? give me a mirror , jerry see ? one temple must be bent lower to make them appear level on my nose because my ears are not equal , are they ? or are they ? i ca n't tell in this mirror are they irregular ? and which one ? does that mean one is worth less than the other ? now , do the glasses look level ? strange sound , that , the rubbing of plastic over the ear , like , like do you have any gum ? my mouth is so dry what 's with this dark suit i'm wearing ? everyone knows i'm a pessimist already tits on a boar ! as i was saying wait , turn the lights down , jerry ! i'm going blind ! and how people look like their dogs and this old olivetti i use word processing bwah ! sounds like processed food ecch ca n't stomach it and now , see , the ugly foot the sock 's off is it irregular ? how does all this lint get all over , anyway ? and this a new pair and why do n't they invent shoes that do n't need socks ? is science unable to solve the odor problem or is there more money in socks ? i hid my money in a sock when i was a kid ching , ching i can hear the coins even now real silver , not these alloy oreos you people spend sheesh , i'm not hungry , but i do n't want any more coffee is this a slow motion film , jerry ? i keep seeing my hand trailing through space , watch and my pen , too ! my god ! look at this desk ! ancient and ink stained , so many scratches , they look like chinese characters it 's spelling out something you are irregular you will be assimilated yeah , but who 's gonna pay my celery ? i won t be treated like a vegetable ha ha ! look , i need a new ribbon cut , jerry , and call my ex , i have some new insults for her not the yellow phone for god 's sake ! reminds me of sardines in mustard sauce see how the plastic glistens with that fishy sheen ? is the plastic irregular ? i see swirls in it cut , cut ! published in m a g