chris lott , in a facebook post , said he missed the poetry of my blog i do n't know if he meant mine , but here 's a new poem i'm posting for his sake and i hope he comments as a result oh the pressure ! deal ? i wanted a mind not like a steel trap but a platinum guillotine the way my father taught me , how to stick it to the sucker like a needle in the eye , how to puncture the white underbelly of his pride with a samurai ritual knife , how to disembowel and afterwards stuff his own entrails with his flesh and feed him to himself as sausage , sausage , feed him to himself as sausage early i learned how to cut human pride with a buzz saw in my hands sawing away pretensions to nobility without connection , intent to expose the rotten infrastructure of the beast and its functionaries tie wearers , thralls , desk jockeys who feel they rule the world happy in their ancillary bureaucratic power like little napoleons watching one administration come and another go content in their g status and the pension and wife and fireplace and dog and braided rug like a picture in home and garden don t ya know , don t ya know ? i learned long ago how to divide the corpse into equal portions after slaughtering an ego , how to arrange the corpse beetles for a celebratory parade in their velveteen tights three pair each , the nimble six footed dancers and come the shiny cockroaches ! i dance on the graves of the proud in patent leather shoes ! but i digress i was fessing to my tendency , learned from my father , to skewer others emotionally for entertainment s sake though i have tried to turn this gift to therapeutic use with some success but many complaints , to be honest humankind cannot bear very much reality why wouldn t i be honest ? who reads poetry anyway ? if i go slicing around not caring whom i wound , remember that i do it for the general weal intent on one thing to excise the dead imitation from the living , to rescue the eternal from the temporal curse , the thorn in the proverbial paw of the proverbial god sacrificed to man come , lord jesus it is the only hope for our blindness i see miracles every hour and the world says i m crazy , that i suffer from delusions what if they are n't delusions ? i don t think they are ! hoo hoo ! ha ha ! i promise , lord , if you come i will no longer wound my fellows with this vicious tongue of mine i will not do soul surgery in public and watch them bleed even though it 's for their own good i promise to be nicer , more like jesus , more like you deal ? namaste , ce