i wish with all my heart that i could report some kind of improvement in my overall mood i do n't want to bore the reader with yet another post on depression , but i have little choice if i dare to speak of my real condition sometimes i do write without regard to my mood sometimes i even attempt humor while overwhelmed with sadness and anxiety because depression is utterly boring as for writing as therapy , i wrote this today depression keep on bleeding , you die keep on crying , nothing happens i'm just a knife away beware this sorrow , it can gut you the way ants hollow out the carcass of a grasshopper i cannot shake your hand , my eyes are in my palms that contact is electric i 'll suck your positive ions out ! i 'll have the pie with no filling what flavor is air ? art is a crock witness to becomes witness for , as in the journalist who films the beheading of his countryman he does n't interfere with history , why the murderers let him in try interfering with me i am suicidal but i am not at risk for suicide i know i have had far too high an opinion of myself over my life , a brittle defense against the collapse of self esteem , but it 's of no good to me now two days ago i did something writers are supposed to do i sent follow up queries to magazines with outstanding submissions this yielded two more publications another editor took a new submission gladly , promising to publish several , calling much of it pure gold none of this made me happier in any way yesterday in a trance i sent off a number of new submissions to both paying and non paying venues i did it to keep busy , because it 's something i know how to do , like washing the dishes an automatic behavior i have no hopes for the submissions , but afterwards i could point and say , look ! i did something there are six more submissions in my submissions folder why do have this overwhelming need to justify myself to myself , as if some authority lived in my head waiting for a report ? why do i pray generically when only medical intervention has helped me in the past ? this is not redemptive suffering this is the suffering of a dumb beast i do n't get stronger or wiser from it i get dumber depression wrecks my mind , i have no confidence in the facts i 've already learned and find new facts harder to digest maybe part of this is aging , i do n't know stick a blade of dry ice in my heart , that 's how i feel beyond broken broken and discarded a headless doll by the roadside there are those who love me , but i do n't call them for the most part , i'm too depressed that does n't mean i would n't appreciate a call , only that i ca n't rouse myself to risk calling what do i have to tell them , anyway ? only bad news eventually the depressive drives everyone but the most devoted away i'm not a martyr and i'm not a saint i'm just one mortal in the grip of a terrible illness , an illness that has destroyed better men than myself today 's post is not a turn for the worse but an admission of the elephant in the room beneath the plastic veneer of adderall i am as sad as ever yesterday afternoon , after making it home , i began to weep beer drinkers know this as popping the cork when they first start to pee they 're guaranteed to start peeing a lot when i give into tears i'm guaranteed to start crying a lot , as i have most of today logically , i responded to cymbalta for one month , to abilify with wellbutrin and prozac for nearly two months , and to adderall with abilify and the others for a few days that anti add effect i first experienced soon vanished what i have n't tried is abilify with cymbalta but i do n't trust cymbalta , it 's so short acting perhaps i should give effexor a try again formerly i could n't tolerate it , but how could it make me any worse ? what i really need is ect kathleen 's insurance wo n't apply to me until march that 's when i need to get aggressive and insist on treatment , as april will mark two years of largely being underwater not having medical insurance for a major illness is a terrible thing it 's also a terrible thing that insurance companies turn you down because you have a major illness insurance is so often for those who do n't need it how else can they keep their premiums down ? in all these years i 've never thought of myself inwardly as disabled , despite the objective opinions of other doctors that would have been too hard on my self esteem yet as a doctor i would forbid me to practice medicine in this state , as i might endanger patients by my lack of confidence my back could n't take a day 's work in any case at least i 've never broken down in front of a patient and if i had , what would it matter in the grand scheme of things ? and why do i mention this little accomplishment except to salvage a shred of pride for myself ? i just want to die , that 's it i'm tired of being sick i 've done all i can i 've taken my meds faithfully , continued to exercise , tried to stay busy , but for what ? to pass the time to kill time i do n't know how i fill a day but i manage to i hate being a burden in print or in person , but here i am i yell out i accept myself as disabled but there are no magic words i am afraid of being accused of self pity but it 's not like that i do n't think , poor me , poor craig i think , help ! help ! help ! code blue ! somebody do something ! someone must be able to do something ! there 's a desperation under my skin and it 's not silent i know i'm sick do n't cry for me , argentina ! kilorats i do feel a little better in the evenings , as in most depressions , captain melancholy