my friend john in grand rapids , michigan , called me this morning to complain about my story being serialized and requested i mail the whole thing to him i was happy to do so until i discovered i had lost his e mail address if you 're reading this , john , you 'll know to send it to me today 's post appears unusually long because of all the dialogue , but it is no more than a little over a thousand words , the usual dose i'm administering at present and today marks the midpoint of the tale pb part viii when he woke larry stood in his doorway there was no sign of ken or his things where 'd ken go ? larry smiled the staff felt it would be better if a newcomer was n't exposed to someone so negative , so we moved him oh , bud said with secret relief where 'd you move him to ? larry laughed some place better for both of you you do n't need to know breakfast in fifteen minutes when bud entered the mess hall he could smell coffee and bacon frying larry motioned him away from the other patients to an empty table , then pushed a bowl of cold oatmeal across with a spoon and a napkin and a glass of water bud tried to look as if he appreciated the food , but his brain whispered eggs and bacon staring at the glistening gray mound of oatmeal he felt angry he began to eat it , though , smiling between bites to impress larry but after the third bite he just could n't stomach it he put his spoon down larry ? he asked yes , bud ? do you think i could have some milk and sugar with this ? why , of course anything else ? yeah could you heat it up , please ? no problem be back in a jiffy what if he 'd asked for bacon and eggs ? better not press his luck at least the oatmeal would be more palatable now after breakfast larry led him back to the interview room , where troy sat twirling a paper clip , looking as smooth as a mannequin maybe he was one good morning , bud ! good morning , troy how was breakfast ? better than yesterday how come ? larry was kind enough to heat my oatmeal and bring me sugar and milk why on earth would he do that ? i guess because i asked him you asked him ? yes what a concept ! what happened when you were in the box and you asked for water ? somebody brought some right though you suffered for a day before you asked do you like suffering ? not particularly what does that mean ? do you or do n't you like to suffer ? no , i do n't like to suffer good did you bring your assignment ? yes bud reached into his back pocket and brought out a creased square of folded paper troy read it over unique good special because i do n't know who i am ? hmmm special because i find it hard to feel special at all ? hmmm this needs some work let 's start with the positive answer you are unique ? well , that 's what i put down since no two people are alike so you rationalized this positive answer although you do n't necessarily feel unique , am i correct ? well yes do you believe you are unique ? i guess so you guess ? no , i believe i am unique but you do n't feel unique , do you ? no so what do feelings have to do with it ? you either are or you 're not are you unique ? yes good how does it feel to be unique ? bud thought for a moment no different but you believe you are unique , thus special , of special value , irreplaceable ? how should this feel ? why , good , i suppose that 's right , you feel good because you 're unique , do n't you ? i feel good because i'm unique , bud parroted back good repeat after me 'i feel great that i am the only one like me ' i feel great that i am the only one like me i am special i am special no one can replace me no one can replace me good ! that 's a beginning how do you feel now ? i feel good because i am special , bud said how good do you feel ? i feel very good how good do you feel that you 're special ? i feel terrific ! bud yelled , and the strangest sensation overtook his body , as if this affirmation filled him with a palpable energy , and the beginnings of a natural smile started to elevate his cheeks you are terrific ! shouted troy , and what 's more , you 're smiling about it ! is n't that great ? that 's great ! good so let 's ignore these other reasons you jotted down since they 're not so positive , ok ? sure , bud agreed troy stood and started pacing with his hands clenched behind him i do , however , need to praise you for discovering your first reason it was excellent , bud thank you so tell me about your father , troy said without transition huh ? never mind , just tell me about your father bud paused to collect his thoughts my father was a distant and demanding figure , he began , who punished us with rather brutal whippings from which i still bear scars on my back nothing was good enough for him for instance , one time i was five minutes late for dinner because of a baseball game and he took me in the garage and whipped me , then made me sit through dinner without crying he was a cruel man and when he died it was almost a relief troy stared at him how could you possibly be so negative ? do n't you know many kids do n't have a father at all ? yes , but and ca n't you see that your father had high standards and sought very hard to enforce them , which expressed his love and dedication to you ? were his whippings consistent ? yes , for the most part so you had a loving father who was a consistent disciplinarian and you have misinterpreted all this through your egoistic nonsense to paint him as some sort of brutal taskmaster , now have n't you ? well , i 'd never really thought about it like that right ! why look at your father 's virtues when you can pity yourself for a difficult childhood ! repeat after me 'i love my father , he did the best he could for me , i honor his memory ' i love my father , he did the best he could for me , i honor his memory how does that feel ? weird fake but is n't it true ? a father who did n't care would n't take the time to discipline his children your father loved you very much , did n't he ? well , i guess do n't guess he either loved you or he did n't did he love you ? my father loved me the best way he could good , but shorten it up my father loved me how does that feel ? strange say it again ! my father loved me again ! my father loved me good ! are you special ? i am special because i am unique and your father loved you my father did love me how does that feel ? good really good ? terrific ! bud yelled despite himself , and felt again a warm surge of confidence in his breast