if you just want to see the pictures , scroll to the end of the post yesterday i was awakened at am by a strange voice is this craig ? craig chaffin ? rubbing the sleep from my eyes , i said yes ? this is mike thompson , your u s representative , and i want to know why you called me a weenie ! huh ? oh , in that letter i sent at your site ? i tried to remember , as i write a lot of letters to people who do n't know me do you know my iraq voting record ? do you know anything about me ? why did you write me such an offensive message ? gathering my dream spattered thoughts well , i assumed i would only get a form letter from you , so i called you a weenie about iraq in case i might actually get a response look s like i did you know , it s hard to get the attention of an institution without spraying some graffiti huh ? never mind is it true you are a doctor , a medical doctor ? yes i can t believe that you , an educated man , would write me this what , do you want me to apologize ? do you know my record on the iraq war ? i was posterized by the republicans for visiting iraq before the war , looking for a non military solution and have you heard of the recent mcgovern bill for immediate re deployment of our troops ? we only have votes so it won t get passed but i voted for it is pelosi with you on this ? of course that s good to know but why do i hear all this noise of trying to compromise with the republicans ? there is no compromise on his website he prides himself for being a moderate democrat known for his bipartisan work that s refreshing to hear , i say , especially with the vetoes and democrats talking about benchmarks and all do you know i m a vet and i saw my buddies blown up and that i go to walter reed every two weeks to visit the wounded ? no , i didn t well i do ! i resisted the temptation to ask , are you a chaplain , too , or just a saint ? because at this point i m wondering what he wants a medal ? an apology ? absolution ? a contribution ? i mean , who am i ? just some nut case from his district that occupies all of coastal northern california uh huh and i ve opposed the iraq war from the beginning i ve always voted against funding the war this i tried to check online but i couldn t find his voting record that s good to know so who told you i wasn t doing anything about iraq ? oh when i attended the peace rallies outside your office , it was the considered opinion of all the activists that you weren t doing enough why don t you tell those people to go protest at the office of someone who supports the war and leave me alone ! are there any other congressman in our district ? uh no so where do you suggest we go ? he could n't even recommend another congressman to bother i suppose you could make this stuff up but i didn t since he called me at am i assume he was in dc for reasons i can only surmise , my e mail must have crawled up his tightly wound ass big time i mean , weenie ? i m sure he wanted to wash my mouth out with soap or rap my knuckles like a nun with a ruler , his being a catholic and a vet and all i m sure in viet nam he never heard anything worse than , watch out for those darn gooks ! oliver stone and stanley kubrick must have lied to me afterwards i did him the courtesy of researching his record online as much as i could in a few hours , and indeed , he should be proud of his stance on iraq , the salmon fisheries , and other issues but why a relative flew with him on a junket to china in and who paid for it , i couldn t find out , so i wrote him back to ask and what a general partnership in travis webb , worth , , might be i have no idea so i asked him about that as well i hear he serves at the world s largest salmon barbecue in fort bragg every year so i told him that i hoped to see him there and meet him in person i was tempted to sign my new letter , your employer , but i don t think he s ready for that yet ah , the hubris in a country of free speech my own congressman spends half an hour on the phone with me because i dared to call him a weenie as my employee , how dare he wake me up early in the morning and rant about my insulting him ! i have every right to insult him ! what after all these years dealing with the press and politicians and constituents , does he expect life to be fair ? is he losing touch ? did his wife turn him down the night before so he had to sublimate some anger at an easy target ? or is he just a stuffed shirt boy scout type like shakespeare 's malvolio , wearing crossed yellow garters ? heck if i know see how he 's already helped me clean up my language ? this kind of behavior can certainly make you doubt the sanity of a politician he took a shotgun to an ant , a very sleepy ant at that luckily the ant , though mistaken about the facts of the congressman s record , did not take the assault personally especially since thompson belongs to the congressional sportsman s club and i assume has guns , just as our late da up here , norm vroman , was discovered to have a cache of illegal weapons and a small marijuana farm when they searched his house after he died norm would have been re elected , btw , if he hadn t croaked in fact , up here , if we d contacted jonathan edwards we might have been able to re elect him from the beyond everyone 's so spiritual up here , though i think them more spiritualist did arthur conan doyle really have a hand in murdering houdini ? now there 's an interesting story since marijuana is the biggest cash crop in our county , i regret i didn t ask him what he was doing about it i assume , like most politicians around here , he opposes legalization to keep our prices high and since we need illegals to harvest the grapes and pears , of course he voted against the seven hundred mile fence down south that 's too bad , because everyone knows that mexicans steal the jobs americans are too lazy to take all that said , i need to ask you this question to check my own sanity have you ever been awakened by a congressman early in the morning who bitterly complained about you calling him a weenie in an e mail message ? i submit that this may be one of the strangest occurrences in my long and interesting life unfortunately , now i can t help but think of mr thompson as weenie mike i mean , who but a weenie would call up a constituent to complain about being called a weenie ? tsk , tsk here 's the good congressman at his wine promoting site now his face does look a little florid in this one , but i would n't accuse him of overindulging in wine promotion it 's probably just too much sun kilobunny , craig erick