i continue in a state of suspended animation i pass for normal when i have to i suppress tears i 've thought of reading through my blog during my two year depression to see what help i might find there , but i know the score i have a genetically inherited biochemical disease that causes extreme and prolonged moods medications sometimes help electricity once helped mainly one must gut it out , endure when i preach endurance to the depressed they are often disappointed of course everyone wants a cure what if there is no cure ? there is n't for bipolars , only management my psychiatrist returns next week two weeks ago he tripled my antispychotic medication this has n't helped a bit , i'm afraid my thoughts are dark as licorice sometimes i laugh and surprise myself i do n't walk around with a sign on my head , suicidally depressed caution no , other people have enough problems and besides , to talk about depression often only makes it worse , why i always leave my shrink 's office feeling worse and casual acquaintances , unless afflicted by the disease , cannot understand i feel apologetic to be down here again but there 's no one to apologize to and no one to blame it is what it is kilorats , ce again , i do n't claim the poems below are good art i do them for therapy , like crossword puzzles viii you want to die more than you want to live this is your state you try not to let on you try to pass for you , careful to give distinct impressions than you ve not withdrawn from life into a cave the cave is you you carry it around , a hermit crab and send some chuckles up the nacreous flu although the mausoleum s rather drab you re only doing what you have to do to engineer some cheer , to fool your friends into thinking you re no more than blue or else distracted by important ends this dedicated sham can last for years don t ruin it by leaking pointless tears ix i cannot take this illness seriously manic depression ? my father s family curse ? the experts have agreed imperiously that of all sadnessess , nothing is worse first the depression , colder than a blade immersed in liquid nitrogen and held burning against a cheek , by self betrayed until the flesh and pain have formed a weld but that s not it that s minor metaphor much too mediocre for malaise in every cell , for darkness at the core of every gilded memory you raise you can t remember hope why seek a cure ? for pain beyond pain only death is sure x who cares for me , how would i even know ? my beloved holds me with her eyes and mine begin to tear i would not show the depths of my disease to one i prize above all others without her love , what then ? deeper inside the spiral of my pain ? scratching wretched hope out with my pen ? institutionalized with the insane ? she is a luxury i don t deserve how can she recall what i once was ? somehow in her mind she must preserve the outline of a man without these flaws of character or chemistry , you choose i m too exhausted to explain my views xi it s not for flaw of character i weep but for a flaw of chemistry , my dear inside the gyri of my brain it creeps infecting all connections , engineer or all the darkest petals of the mind blighted and browned , hideous to behold , a nightmare to myself , a melon rind upon a garbage heap deformed by mold the green fuzz on the peel is the thing but fungus should only concern the dead i feel its hyphae in my reasoning can t someone suck this poison from my head ? if brain were foot i d apply fungal cream perhaps i should begin with trephining xii whenever my mind is not occupied by something else , i think of suicide and castigate myself for it i ride the pale horse , the monkey is my guide the monkey steers the horse , chattering loud the horse proceeds in circles round and round i gather up my history in a shroud the audience makes that sucking in breath sound cheer ! what a lovely word ! an anodyne for the purple cement that clogs my mind and heart in a malevolent design of petty feedback loops , pause and rewind where did the cheer go ? why am i insane ? shut the monkey up ! the horse is lame