i spit out some rough sonnets , as the reader knows i wanted to call them dark sonnets but now think that suicidal sonnets might sell better , though the alliterative marketing ploy does cheapen them a little my purpose here is not to cheapen but improve them , as i shall now post the sonnets after adequate revision to render them passable if not good per se one ought never to judge the merit of one 's own work except in that case where some other no talent asshole gets lauded and you must scream that you are better , as i did with robert creeley , my late nemesis , who as a lyrical poet was every bit the equal of helen steiner rice my boast occurs in the essay , my struggle with literary narcissism without further ado , the new , updated and currently revised author sanctioned versions of suicidal sonnets in order as i get to them i once more this fell infection of the mind galls itself , one wound wears down another , the crust of of failing surfaces will find more cells to infiltrate , more smooth to smother i put a stethoscope upon my head to eavesdrop on the stuttering machine , heard nothing but the clawing of the dead except a jukebox skipping in routine i thought of pills and blades and guns and cars , the sordid images of methods used they haven t answered is there life on mars ? as yet from judgment shouldn t i be recused until they do ? i will endure this state patiently , though it kills me to wait ii i m swallowed by the groaning of the reef at one more wave s untiring onslaught i listen to the outboard for relief , a brighter racket than my pounding thought you there do you think in straight lines ? do thoughts follow each other , hand to hand ? or is it that your insight s without spines like a sea urchin s skeleton on sand ? vanilla life , vanilla in your veins , uncomplicated , unexamined days if only i could tender you the reins to my life , would i sail through the quays sipping a gin fizz , waving to the shore ? i d give my soul for your white bread rapport iii passenger , conductor , does it matter ? who can tell in such a blasted mood only broken by the wheels clatter , spelling out in morse the end of good ? to stand upon the platform with a noose is all i ask of life or hope of death the world s wheels moved i m the caboose left on the track far from the engine s breath gather the spikes you used to lay the rails , gather the beams , the workmen , engineers , tell them that in all of life s travails a man is just the sum of his worst fears it suits me to be left behind , to rust else junk me outright there s no train i trust as to my mood , well what can i say ? i had a few fair days over the weekend , i 've felt marginally better since a calcium channel blocker medication was removed , but overall i feel fragile , uncertain , at times bored i also have the sense of forestalling any major ambition or life changes , because i do not know what path i wish to take further , i do n't even know if the path i 've taken thus far was more choice or chance but that 's the big one , is n't it ? jacob i loved but esau i hated i take up god 's preferences in my essay above on literary narcissism it 's worth reading because it takes issue with that age old question , why him and not me ? maybe it comes down to birth order as the second same sex child i always felt left out , shunned , a tag a long at best i expect to be rejected by the older children , to have to fight for my place and my rights suspicious , paranoid , at best circumspect i just do n't trust life do you ? do you have what erik erikson called basic trust ? do you expect the universe to favor you ? god bless you ! i belong to the other camp the universe is a hard place , it takes guts to survive , nothing is given to you , things are rarely fair , give what you can but try not to invest your heart too much , it will be broken of course , not physically bonding with one 's mother makes for competition in causes , and memory is no sure thing , as i observed my bipolar daughter in infancy did n't want to physically bond with anybody at times she always reserved discomfort in any situation and was unabashed to show it when she was unhappy there was no comforting her she had to wind down like a screaming clock so blaming my mother for not physically bonding with me may not be true mothers have always gotten too much credit and blame in psychology , but given their propinquity to the devlopmental process , it can hardly be helped yet here we are and the question of psychology is how much can be healed ? some say all some say some some say virtually none i say it depends on how you define healing for me healing equals acceptance accepting an abusive father is the best i can do , letting go of judgment and fantasies of retribution , letting go of the question why and a host of other things that accompany true acceptance , along with the necessary forgiveness but is this healing ? i think not healing would be as if it never happened all right , after an appendectomy you have a small scar but in a miraculous healing you should have no scar at all the tissue should have been completely restored by this definition i do not believe in healing i believe acceptance and integration are the best we can do the more we accept the origin and cause of our negative automatic behaviors , the better we are at not performing them kilorats , ce