my mood is rising , largely due , i think , to a change in medication last wednesday , but i do n't want to stake too huge a claim on wellness until my feet are sure beneath me one huge part of my uplift was an inspiring talk i had with a friend , who also invited me to a weekly spiritual gathering that i enjoyed and intend to continue to intend when i went through the two year depression here on this blog , one thing my psychiatrist did in all that time was to hold hope for me when i could n't hope for myself hope is an underrated virtue , and the depressive may be so sick he feels he has none to cling to , but if others insist he may grab a taste of it himself , and a taste can turn into a meal if the chemicals follow suit now without further ado , thirteen dark sonnets in the order penned i once more this fell infection of the mind galls itself , one wound wears down another , the crust of failing surfaces will find more cells to infiltrate , more smooth to smother i put a stethoscope upon my head to eavesdrop on the stuttering machine , hear nothing but the clawing of the dead matched to a jukebox skipping in routine i thought of pills and blades and guns and cars , the sordid images of methods used they haven t answered is there life on mars ? as yet from judgment shouldn t i be recused until they do ? i will endure this state patiently , though it kills me to wait ii i m swallowed by the groaning of the reef at one more wave s untiring onslaught i listen to the outboard for relief , a brighter racket than my pounding thought you there do you think in straight lines ? do thoughts follow each other , hand to hand ? or is it that your insight s without spines like a sea urchin s skeleton on sand ? vanilla life , vanilla in your veins , uncomplicated , unexamined days if only i could tender you the reins to my life , would i sail through the quays sipping a gin fizz , waving to the shore ? i d give my soul for your white bread rapport iii passenger , conductor , does it matter ? who can tell in such a blasted mood only broken by the wheels clatter , spelling out in morse the end of good ? to stand upon the platform with a noose is all i ask of life or hope of death the world s wheels moved i m the caboose left on the track far from the engine s breath gather the spikes you used to lay the rails , gather the beams , the workmen , engineers , tell them that in all of life s travails a man is just the sum of his worst fears it suits me to be left behind , to rust else junk me outright there s no train i trust iv here is my soul inside a water drop place it on a slide , adjust the scope look at all the creatures in that slop ! diversity proliferates in hope which corresponds to me ? bacterium , amoeba , something with a cell wall ? or is the dynoflagellate delirium of tendrils better fit for the appalled ? job wished he d been aborted , i understand there should be limits to what a man can suffer alas we have no manual at hand to say , he s had enough , don t make it tougher fate sends its spider line to knot the heart and jerks until even strong men fall apart v put down the knife , lady , the candle s done out , out , out where is the blood ? you waved a blade but violence was outgunned by guilt s black bile pooling where you stood dame melancholy , with your crude stone blade , whom did you try to murder but my self ? my little self i ll not be unmade to add another trophy to your shelf depression now sounds like a common cold with remedies as legion as the dirt my little self s been badgered and cajoled until each onion skin was bathed in hurt i swallow medications in the hope i won t exchange a necktie for a rope vi hopkins wrote , no worst there is none but isn t it hubristic to declare that you have reached the limit of despair as in a total eclipse of the sun ? in that event a wild corona glows around the edges of the blackened moon , a fiery nimbus that as yet allows more than pure darkness in the afternoon what if there is a worst ? how will you cope if what despair you ve reached was amateur , nothing promethean , minor in scope , a taste , a touch your hope was premature ! it s perilous to label something worst unless the lord himself pronounce you cursed vii even though cloistered by a bloody veil , dame suicide , it s not polite to boast that you like making humans into toast or something else equally dry and pale your hands , so fine , as if made for the harp cannot be clasped without making an end you strum a dirge irreverently sharp designed to cut deeper than we can mend sharp as addiction or the death of love , hard as affliction , colder than hate s hold , the sickest kneel to you as if to move your soul to pity , dying as they grow bold i hold back beauty is as beauty does why not give in ? because , because , because viii you want to die more than you want to live and smile tightly , try not to let on with luck you ll pass for you , careful to give distinct impressions than you ve not withdrawn entirely get up , get dressed and shave and go to work to earn your daily bread each day is one day closer to the grave but on you clomp as if your shoes were lead you re only doing what you have to do to engineer some cheer , to fool your friends into thinking you re no more than blue or else distracted by important ends this dedicated sham can last for years don t ruin it with your reptilian tears ix since experts have agreed imperiously that of all life s sadnesses , nothing s worse i m forced to take this illness seriously manic depression , my genetic curse imagine that i m finally best at something ! and not at poetry so much is clear i m best at diving , falling , crashing , tumbling into a state audie murphy would fear to have no personality , to have no god , no sense of human fullness in the chest , only a sheet of paper thin fa ade too easily torn and crumpled in a fist is indescribable i ve made my bed inside the liquid demons of my head x who cares for me , how would i even know ? my beloved holds me with her eyes and mine begin to tear i would not show the depths of my disease to one i prize above all others without her love , what then ? deeper inside the spiral of my pain ? scratching wretched hope out with my pen ? institutionalized with the insane ? she is a luxury i don t deserve how can she recall what i once was ? somehow in her mind she must preserve the outline of a man without these flaws of character or chemistry , you choose i m too exhausted to explain my views xi it s not for flaw of character i weep but for a flaw of chemistry , my dear inside the gyri of my brain it creeps infecting all connections , engineer of all the darkest petals of the mind blighted and browned , hideous to behold , a monster to myself , a worthless rind upon a garbage heap , deformed by mold the green fuzz on the peel is the thing , but fungus is the province of the dead i feel its hyphae in my reasoning can t someone suck this poison from my head ? if brain were foot i d apply fungal cream perhaps i should begin with trephining xii whenever my mind is not occupied by something else , i think of suicide and castigate myself for it i ride a pale horse , the monkey is my guide the monkey steers the horse , chattering loud the horse proceeds in circles round and round i gather up my breath , a broken cloud the audience makes that sucking in breath sound cheer a lovely word ! an anodyne for the meconium that clogs my mind and spirit in malevolent design of petty feedback loops , pause and rewind where did the cheer go ? am i insane ? shut the monkey up ! the horse is lame xiii and why should i wake up , and what for ? my nightmares are more pleasant than my days darkness eats my days , though i abhor the process , i am helpless to erase the code that casts my future in a bag meant , perhaps , to drown some hapless cat my life s such an excruciating drag all my expression lines have fallen flat it s worse than botox to be squeezed like this , to have your personality becalmed if there s a devil , did his judas kiss pickle my ego until it was embalmed ? the dead are walking i am of the dead although this whole scenario s in my head at kilorats , ce