last night at colored horse studios in ukiah i gave my first featured reading from the new book out of a crowd of not counting kathleen , me and the dog i sold three books i also received an honorarium of i could get used to this ! so if any of you west coast readers have connections to venues , just call on me and i 'll send it along with love from me to you in paging through the book while reading , i concentrated on lighter pieces for some reason i did n't want to get into depression or anything else too flypapery i got a lot of laughs with fat and the obesion , for instance one woman bought a book for her manic depressive son , who happens to be my size another bought the book because of at the vietnam memorial and another bought the book for the power of the reading afterwards was an open mic where well , let 's just say it was an open mic a good time was had by all , with red wine and chocolate for refreshments here 's fat fat two days ago i woke up fat i'm not gonna hate myself for that i did indulge my appetite like a starving rat so i avoid mirrors and dress in black i m not gonna hate myself for that i may be fat but i'm not blind i did indulge my appetite because depression savaged my mind you see , it 's not easy to be easy on me i'm all spiky inside like a cactus two days ago i woke up fat i may be fat but i'm not blind if i did indulge my appetite , it was only to distract my stomach s acid pit from the black hole of my mind , too ravaged to react on second thought it 's not entirely light but that 's the thing about the book , as one reviewer put it it 's slanted light dark humor unexpected twists of light it 's hard for me to be all this or that in a poem modulation requires shifts to retain the reader 's attention and entertain him without such contrasts it would be greeting card verse ah helen steiner rice and susan polis schulz ! not much to report otherwise except the fact that i intend to assay my garden today and try to uncover some of the bloomables from beneath the encroachment of weeds oh , j alfred ditched me the other night on our walk , i suppose because it was getting too dark i crated him when i got home out of anger i think he understood if not , it let me do something with my pissed offness another light poem from the volume ? why the hell not ? though if you get it free here , why buy the book ? because many of the poems have been published through journals since defunct , therefore you ca n't find them on the net still , if you google me , as we recently discussed , you will have more than enough to read but ah hell , get out of the cyberworld and get your hands on a real book the hardback is the best value here 's the poem god and cheetos don t we all want to meet god , engage omnipotence in conversation warm and natural as in why pete rose is banned from cooperstown and whether augustine s confessions are more an exercise in literary narcissism than true devotion ? i prefer pascal , but what would god think ? picture us on a park bench , dispensing crusts to avian communicants while sharing cheetos from an inexhaustible bag perhaps we d join the shoeless fellowship of mumbling schizophrenics or join in cursing citations on windshields and could he take his own name in vain ? there are some things even god can t do , like changing history that would be dishonest lord , thank you for the consciousness that allows me to scribble this how about an autograph ? in blood , of course so rudely forced into human form how divine it must have been when you rejoined yourself ! ok , so there are a few dark threads dangling , but overall a happy poem ? how would i know ? i ca n't rightly judge my own work oprah , i'm calling you , i need a sales boost ! you can have me on your couch to discuss romantic love in the new millennium and manic depression as well in fun at kilobunny , ce