anonymous said whadabunchacrap suck it up this comment came from my adoring wife , who in addition sent me a hilariously scathing letter about my last post , particularly for thinking i could possibly hide any mood change from her all seeing eye , although she did admit her illness made her , perhaps , just a little less perceptive than usual quite an admission from the all knowing spouse i totally agree with her comment , of course i tell myself the same thing but it does n't help until my chemicals improve yesterday i did n't cry because i was too zonked out by the antipsychotic i added to my regimen thursday night , which allows little feeling i was moving through water all day i kept as busy as i could despite my gnawing cold today i am irritable , i do n't want to be bothered by anything or anybody , i can be snappish i feel bitchy as i have said before , this is often a good sign of coming out of a depression , even a short one have i told you my bipolar daughter has been in crisis lately and i 've been on the phone with her a lot ? she most needs me when her illness acts up , although it takes a different form than mine she tends to go into mixed states more , with alternating tears , curses , and laughter in a matter of minutes very emotionally labile i tend to get stuck for months on one end or the other i just wanted you to know that whatever my state , i can always forget myself for the benefit of my children i pray i do n't fall for pain pills or antihistamines again i still feel like such an ass my feelings are in accord with my being , i think i wrote a villanelle this morning which i think expresses some of the angry ambivalence of a mixed state , a state neither depressed nor happy , rather bitchy and unstable , although , of course , these mood tones are transformed into something else once you commit to a poem waiting look ! fireworks fang the bloody sky ! the end has come the button s on repeat i m just waiting for my dog to die faces melt and bones electrify when we re gone , someone pull up the sheet look ! fireworks fang the bloody sky ! the sport of kings has changed to genocide kill them all , kill all the fucking sheep ! i m just waiting for my dog to die i didn t vote and someone asked me why one madman or another must compete look ! fireworks fang the bloody sky ! it s easy , this apocalyptic cry if you brought hope we d all fall at your feet i m just waiting for my dog to die he s old , he limps and barely hears my cry he won t get off the floor to fetch a treat look ! fireworks fang the bloody sky ! i m just waiting for my dog to die kathleen , of course , did n't like the poem , as it included our aged dog but what can you do ? a writer needs material , and the more depressed i am , the worse kenyon looks to me neil young 's tune is on the radio , helpless , helpless , helpless , helpless are n't we all ? ka ching ! i never liked the song i never liked his falsetto or three chord repetition songs like this one , not to mention his ham handed lead guitar playing , but i have come to like neil better in my dotage , just as i 've finally begun to accept what little talent u has to offer mostly bono 's how i digress i want everyone to slap me today i want people to throw rocks at me to help externalize my own anger towards myself i think kathleen will do a fair job of it two kilorats , ce