here in mexico at the bagel cafe i found a copy of time with a page of tips on how to have a successful blog i have followed none of them first , you need a lot of links to other blogs and sites and topics to make the search engines second , you need to stay on one topic so , a man goes into a blog and asks for some ink we do n't serve ink how 'bout some paper ? nope all right , give me pixels on ice we only serve pixels neat whatever this passes for humor ? not ! i just made it up out of a bad pun i apologize if you read it who reads this crap , anyway ? gotta stay on one topic hmmm my one consistent topic is going be well considered , factually researched and currently hot to pic from so many topics ouch ! yet i have chosen one , the one you 're dying to hear about my topic , thus , is you my blog is entirely devoted to you how are you ? what are your worries ? money , weight , relationships , illness ? e mail me your troubles or bravely post them here by the way , dear abby died and her daughter 's doing the column i'm so much better qualified ! not only am i a family doctor , i trained in psychiatry you ca n't afford my help but soon i 'll publish my paypal account what 's free advice worth , anyway ? still , my topic is you and your health and happiness ask me anything why just yesterday a man complained to me that his wife thought she was a refrigerator i said , so what ? he said , i would n't mind but when she sleeps with her mouth open the light keeps me up this passes for wit ? not ! i stole the joke from some movie i ca n't remember i'm forgetting more and more these days as my hard drive is full and every new memory must replace an old one like the etomology of aardvark dutch for earth pig why should this fact remain in my head when i 've forgotten my niece and nephew 's birthdays ? sorry , jack and gilly this blog affords me the opportunity to stay on topic and talk about you you , hypocrite lecteur ! mon semblable , mon frere ! thine , ce , the failed blogger p s there 's a picture up of me now for the brave of heart