as soon as i put up my website , i go to check a couple of links and find that the venerable e zine , niederngasse , no longer appears on a search and its domain name seems up for grabs can anyone clue me in on this ? the web is such a living thing i must have upwards of twenty poems in their archives over the years , and now , suddenly , my link is no good ? eek on the net everything is so five seconds ago , soon to be nanoseconds today i will post a poem i think the reader will enjoy , whether poetically experienced or not , the kind of poem i wish i could write more often it 's my favorite kind , where subject object dualism is overcome , though not without a protracted struggle and that 's just in the content of the poem but what i'm really referring to is the design of the poem if possible , i like to write a poem where the reader just drops in , like those old hertz commercials where the driver drops into the car from the air suddenly he is driving suddenly you find yourself in a poem fun to do if you can pull it off the reader will judge and for the record , although it wo n't upload for my profile picture very well , this is pretty much how i really look this democrat approved funding bill for iraq makes me want to throw up from deep inside my colon weenies ? not strong enough shit sucking maggots ? we have to be politically realistic , reid and pelosi we have sent the president a message the message ? we bend over for you , king george please send us some pork barrel knee pads oh i'm sure i do n't know the half of it , all the political reasons , what republicans have sworn to vote with the dems on the next funding bill , yada , yada , but judging from appearances a bad idea in life and politics does n't it seem the dems blinked ? or could i be wrong ? we will see with the next funding vote myself , i 'd vote against this bill on principle no matter what the liberal leadership told me since pelosi married money , i guess it 's easy for her to give away , in the same way senator reid gives it to his sons with our taxes , generous man that he is do n't you think most elected representatives give in to the temptation of entitlement ? i 've worked all these years in congress and i get paid nothing like a ceo and i have a zillion constituents and i'm always raising millions i can only spend on my campaign and not myself and is n't it time i did a little something for myself and my family ? it may smell but as long as it 's legal , by god they 'll forgive me besides , the voters only know what television tells them if i do n't paste in my poem soon , no one will read it , so i 'll save my political griping for another day have a lovely memorial day weekend , and try to forget that it 's these bozos in washington that our troops laid down their lives for you may say the people , but in our system , they are the people that 's how a representative democracy works how i lament that america does not have the superior parliamentary system prime minister reid ? it would never happen , though in the analogy it would more likely be pelosi here 's my damn poem , a tad long , though not as long as the swim , posted on the heels of my brief discussion of exercise from the last post btw , i did break a zero yesterday , weighing it at a svelte ! swim i hope to enter the zen of unconscious body mechanics and escape my radio head always tuned to kfuck scanning the pool s bottom i note the aging plaster in brown patterns like pee stains once at a ymca i saw a turd on the bottom slowly dispersing though i love children i canceled my membership ropes held up by donut floats divide the lanes whose centers are marked by a royal blue stripes on the bottom , six tiles wide should i count the strokes each lap requires ? strangely , the number changes arithmetic is not forgetting though it prunes language down to force uniformity of propulsion you risk losing the rhythm required of motion , not worth it i m in bubble land , look ! pearls of exhalation dribble from my mouth ! while swimming it always seems there is much more air to exhale than inhale , only that moment to turn your head and gulp tired of local geography kfuck now turns to poetry , how jane hirschfield s three years at a zen monastery might help silence the mind in the rhythm of the sickle of the harvest , in the traditional planting of the rice shoots , calf deep in muddy water in the employment of the definite article or even in making tea heat water add tea let steep pour ten spondees in porcelain cups thoughts come in words written in lipstick on the mirror where peace once was i want being without thought , only the water sliding by look she swims well in the next lane , nice ass ! see ? i verbalize even my distractions words speak only of what s already past , ca n't catch the next stroke , useless as bus exhaust is there a radio channel for the deaf ? how i hate kfuck ! i wonder if consciousness is only material , i think of brain injured patients who cannot speak or think in words then whence epistemology ? from a fucking stone ? some part of me keeps track of every lap lap , chant and how my daughter s doing single mother and all while my brain amazingly directs my limbs in spite of all the multitasking , three strokes , three strokes swoosh swoosh swoosh gulp air , breathe out in sibilant bubbles , arms heavy as pewter because lead is clich fuck kfuck , all that sisyphean gossip , all that herculean chatter and object association nonsense , plums and women s asses , leg irons and horseshoes beaten bright red on anvils like lava expanding hawaii getting bigger i ate limpets there from the rocks saw three moray eels need new swimming trunks don t deserve them still too fat what salad to have afterwards jacuzzi or not ? perhaps a hemisphereectomy is the answer remove half my brain and it won t talk to itself so much one mind one action one thought one bliss one mind one action one thought one bliss finally it came to me , how to turn it off , though perhaps you must first reach a certain level of physical exhaustion but here it is , old as lao tsu pretend you re asleep you dream of a body it s not your body someone else is swimming , someone else is breathing , someone else is thinking in words while you float in a wordless sleep if you begin to wake , say only not my body , not my body last lap at kilobunny too sore to do much today , ce