we want explanations for the inherent chaos of life , to be certain , for reassurance do n't we ? i need you to agree with me here , being the fragile person that i am in such a hard world so why do we act , think , or feel a certain way ? why do certain things happen ? why are we here , for that matter ? we all want to know why does this yen for certainty makes us anxious ? well , because see , i look for a story to fit the facts as i perceive them , and it makes sense , to me there 's a logic , and that 's what i want , sense in a senseless world , or so it seems i need a reason read any newspaper and you 'll get them , reasons , but are they reasonable ? maybe they 're the essential fictions that keep us going , that get us out of bed each day but maybe we 're just kidding ourselves call me cleopatra , the queen of de nile none of this seems particularly alarming , unless of course your reasons clash with mine then it 's time for battle , because there i go again , if you 're right , then maybe i'm wrong that makes me anxious so i 'll argue , attack , erect a defense , react , withdraw , and judge that 's good no , that 's bad that 's right no wrong again , i'm telling you my story , maybe it 's yours as well , a story that makes the world work , or better yet , play , whichever you prefer the former if you 're part wasp like me maybe this story upsets you , conflicts with your view of the world maybe you think i'm wrong but listen please , listen why ca n't you listen ? why ca n't you understand ? now there 's a visceral word under stand support me hold me up carry me hold this i ca n't tell you all the times i 've asked my wife to do this honey , hold this picture her eyes rolling what is required for you to understand me , and me you ? listen rather than give a more detailed answer for you more story , let 's have a discussion wow , that word sounds serious dis and cuss maybe converse is better wait , con and verse , as in versus all that sounds so contentious con and tense how about dialogue ? oops die and log let 's just talk your turn go white anglo saxon protestant think protestant work ethic