pondering spirituality , singleness , and missions on one of my favorite thinking rocks what would happen if i listened to my heart ? what if i stopped seeking to be the most spiritual that i can be on my own ? what if i stopped trying to get to that position that i think god honors the most ? would god be disappointed in me ? would i be less of a christian because i ca n't make it on my own ? would god honor the desires of my heart and show me that he was in them ? what am i trying to prove ? i told god that i was willing to go anywhere and do anything for him , and i gave up my dream of the satisfied settled christian family i desired i told god that i would be ready and prepared to be a missionary in case he called , and i gave up an education as an accountant and a future , well paying job i told god i would be a missionary , and i gave up marriage to the man i loved what must i give up next ? how much loss must my heart endure to please my god ? i have told god that i will go as a missionary even as a single woman to unreached peoples does this mean that i must now give up the hope of ever having a husband and children ? are all of my desires wrong that he must take them from me ? am i a failure if i admit that i cannot do this on my own ? is it okay to need someone to love and to need to need someone to love me ? my heart yearns for companionship in seeking after god and serving him oh , to be able to glorify god through the in a marriage relationship but , i fear , as a single woman , that my heart will continually seek its companion in the pursuit of god by attaching itself to leading men in inappropriate ways i do want to be pure without detaching myself from life and the ability to love am i too weak , lord , if i say that i cannot fully do this on my own ? i am not as strong as i thought i had to be , but i long to be used by you i long to give myself fully to you and to others no distractions , forward together what do i do ? move forward on my own , or wait , listen , and trust the you will fulfill the desires you have given me even if others do not understand show me your way lord i love you your daughter , cynthia marie