cindy that is me who am i in this world ? there was a time in my life that if i were to be asked who i was , i would have said , i am cindy , but in my head i would have thought , and i am nothing at that time , i thought that i was nothing i was deeply depressed , i hated myself , and the only things that i could think about myself were negative things i isolated myself and thought that i had no influence on the world around me , or if i did have an influence it was negative i was diagnosed with bipolar disorder at that time time has moved on , and i have been out of my depression for a long time now i now know that i am definitely something definitely someone god has shown me that but who is that someone ? am i just someone with a mental illness , or is there more to me than that ? i decided to sit down and write out a list of as many aspects of myself as i could think of they are not feelings i have , nor are they descriptive words about me or my personality , nor are they view others have about me they are just statements of fact , i am a an so here it goes who is cindy ? i am a believer in jesus a follower of jesus a woman a wife a daughter a sister an aunt a granddaughter a niece a friend a neighbor a church member a greeter an american a person with dutch heritage a reader a researcher a writer a blogger a story teller a music lover a pianist an artist a bible college graduate a world traveler a jerusalem pilgrim a cat owner an animal lover a former missionary a volunteer a vice president a mentor a listener a speaker a group facilitator a teacher a bird watcher a fisher woman a driver a hockey fan a swimmer a cyclist a hiker a phlebotomist a medical lab tech assistant a person with bipolar disorder a person who has overcome a mental health advocate a trained certified peer counselor a person who prays a reader of god 's word an ambassador a distributor of god 's word a witness for jesus christ a person who loves a person who lives i am me i am cindy hi who are you ? you are not nothing you are something you can try this exercise too write a list of as many aspects of yourself that you can think of these aspects are not feelings you have , nor are they descriptive words about you or your personality , nor are they view others have about you remember just statements of fact , i am a an examples i am a your spiritual self a your sex a relation to people in your family a your culture a your actives a your hobbies a your job a member of etc stop and do this now if you have the time then read on did you finish your list ? who are you ? how do you relate to the world ? what is your unique combination of who you are ? how can you use this list to find ways to be involved with the world around you ? what is the most important thing on your list ? seeing my own list shows me that i am not just my job or just my mental illness i am so much more i have so many things i can tell people when i am introduced to them for the first time i do n't have to say what i do or how the world may want to define me i could say , i am a story teller then we could share stories how much fun that could be ! or , i could say , i am a listener , and ask them questions about who they are there are so many options , fun and serious one way that i will use my list is to think about the people that care about me and those that i care about people in my family that care about me as well as friends and people in my church for example my life is important to them when i get down , i can use this as an encouragement to keep on going in life another way to use this list it to think of ways that i can get involved and connect with other people is there a book group i could join , a writing class that i could take , a neighbor that i could invite to go on a bike ride with me ? rather than isolate myself in the house , i can think of ways to get involved the top thing on my list is that i am a believer in jesus christ this is the single most important aspect of who i am i want each of the people that i connect with to see this and to want to know jesus also i want them to be able to put that on the top of their list too one aspect of me on my list is that i am a writer and blogger i am a reader of god 's word , i am a person who prays i am connecting with you now i am praying that you will find a bible and read i am praying for you to come to know jesus and be saved i am praying that being a believer in jesus will be the first thing you want on your list as well for god so loved the world that he gave his one and only son , that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life john who are you ? you are many things you are someone loved by god you are offered eternal life because of god 's son do you believe ? would you like to add believer in christ to your list ?