as we read in the previous post , depression effects million people year round i was interested in alternative ways to treat depression and came across one interesting treatment that not only helps treat depression but anxiety , adhd and ptsd too yoga ! so gals throw on those mental yoga pants and guys break out those mental under armor shirts and let s get our mats ready ! ! when some of you think yoga , you probably think i can t bend like that or i 'd rather relax at home with the tv that 's meditation though there are many positive effects of participating in yoga for many types of people earlier this month there was a study published by university of michigan health system about the correlation between expectant mothers and depression the study reported that pregnant women who were identified as psychiatrically high risk and who participated in a week mindfulness yoga intervention saw significant reductions in depressive symptoms mothers to be also reported stronger attachment to their babies in the womb if this could work with pregnant women who have a whole host of different things going on hormonally , i wonder what could it do to a man with ptsd ? or even a child with adhd ? in an effort to answer these questions as i always do i go surfing the net i found a website called naturalsociety com , which reported a study that was conducted with veterans of war who have a dx of ptsd the article reported that they veterans engaged in a program featuring guided meditation , yoga asanas stretching poses , stress reduction techniques and breathing exercises after six weeks the group had an overall decrease of points on the clinician administered ptsd scale caps , moving the group from moderate to severe anxiety down to mild through moderate the improvement was dramatic and the control group showed no improvement umm awesome ! no words ! adhd ? one of the pillars of yoga is being able to improve concentration with the combination of the stretching and poses it has been known whether you have adhd or not to improve concentration just something to think about if the child can t concentrate to begin with how will he she be able to do the stretching or poses ? a different post for a different day anxiety ? the other pillar , which i always thought the real reason people do yoga is for the deep breathing and relaxation techniques need i say more when we are talking about anxiety ? whether you go now to your closest gym or not , you cannot deny the positive attributes that yoga can play in a person with mental illness thank you class namaste ! have a good day and good weekend ! yes yoga and depression of pregnant women