when a company funds a study that finds unfavorable results , they can always deep six it but what if someone else conducts the study someone you did not fund ? well , a lilly employee had some interesting thoughts on the matter a study was conducted , then presented at a conference a lilly employee found out about it , noted that it pointed toward negative safety implications for olanzapine zyprexa and then had some ideas bold in original , color highlights added if we work on the assumption that this poster will be published as a full manuscript soon , our attention needs to turn to how we can minimise its impact on both the global and local level where will this paper be published ? can we stop delay it ? i think it would be very difficult to delay except if one of our scientists could show them that their methodology was flawed do we know the author ? can we exert any influence ? this would be very dangerous as it would be seen as lilly behaving unethically and applies to the below points who sits on the editorial board of the targeted journal ? can we influence them in any way , with respect to the limitations of this methodology ? should we conduct a communications initiative aimed at all influential referees , addressing the above point ? to review , one idea was to find out where the paper might get submitted for publication , then try to influence the editor , as well as sending out a communications initiative in an attempt to bias individuals who might review the article to determine its suitability for publication or , influence the author with what ? cash , a baseball bat , hookers and cocaine , what ? how does a drug company that did not even sponsor study x call on study x 's lead investigator and tell him , hey you really should n't publish that ! unbelievable happy ending the author in question has published multiple studies in the area , so either lilly thought better of their idea to suppress the evidence or their efforts failed miserably it would seem as if lilly may wish to hire a dr purple type character for future efforts , , ? ? source one of the infamous zyprexa documents