i'm sitting on a hotel bed , watching football , about two miles from my youngest brother 's home after a long , chilly drive my car 's heat is not working properly i spent just hours with my brother 's family and my mom , and already i'm wishing i was somewhere else sometimes i hate how screwed up my family is and why does screwed up get so much more pronounced during holidays ? it started with me getting lost , not understanding my brother 's directions or my brother not understanding where i was who knows , but that began the tension as i entered his home , despite my resolve not to comment on my frustration , my brother 's initial sarcastic comment initiated a brief heated discussion it went something like this , i was right no , i was right ! no , i was right ! no , i was right ! get the general idea ? futile stupid i do n't even think we said hello i fed my new nephew , visited with his year old brother , gave my mom her presents , and listened to my sister in law 's comic antidotes about my father 's latest clueless , social mis steps he 's really good at being socially inept ! nothing substantive was mentioned , which is fine no goodies , coffee or even water was ever offered again , not unusual with at least two of my brothers perhaps social ineptness is inherited ? all in all , it was an awkward , barely comfortable time my brother and his wife left for her grandfather 's home , as is her tradition , and my mom made me pancakes while making pancakes , she told me my other brother asked if i was going to be around when he arrived in two days my mom added that after she reported i would n't be around , my brother expressed disappointment and said he had wanted to see me this is the brother of whom i wrote a few days ago this is the brother who lives less than one hour from my home after pasting me with a verbally abusive tirade , this is the same brother i have n't spoken to in over a year i should have kept my mouth shut , but i did n't before i knew what hit me , anger and resentment boiled to the surface i spurted , oh bullshit , mom ! he could n't care less about seeing me he 's so selfish and self centered ! he does n't care about anyone but himself ! the last time we spoke he blasted me with names so mean he 's never apologized , because he does n't do that , and we have n't spoken since ! to my mom 's credit , she ignored my heated burst as if nothing had escaped my lips , which is what i immediately wished , that nothing would have escaped my lips she said , i'm not sure this pan will work for pancakes i looked and said , sure it will and so we went almost comical really i thanked my mom for the good pancakes as i exited my brother 's home i could have spent the rest of the evening with my mom , but i chose to come sit on this bed with my dog instead she probably does n't feel too good about that , and realizing this right now for the first time , i do n't feel too good about it either she flew up here to see us i guess when one is raised around social ineptitude , it does rub off damn ! what is it about families that brings out the worst in some of us ? how can i be so comfortable and real with my friends , yet uncomfortable and protected with the ones i'm supposed to know and love best ? we keep trying , but i feel as if we barely tolerate one another versus actually enjoying each other it 's always a relief to leave , and from the rooms of aa , i know i am not alone in experiencing that exit relief why is that ? what is that ? anyone ? i'm feeling frustrated with what feels like banging my head against a wall why do i put myself through this ? my family does n't know the real me even if i could show them , i'm not sure they 'd see the true me anyway my brother proved as much with his ages old anger during his hurtful tirade years ago the shit he referred to , the feelings he vented they were old , very old it was as if he were yelling at the pre teen me , age , rather than the adult etta , age i'm feeling frustrated i'm feeling sorry for myself i'm feeling guilty i'm feeling sorry for myself i need to approach this differently , but i have no idea how to do that no idea whatsoever ! i ca n't continue to bang my head against the wall i need a different perspective perhaps i need to practice some forgiveness maybe i need to try out acceptance i do n't know i'm totally open to suggestion thanks for letting me vent