it 's been a long time since i 've missed writing two days in a row i think this may be the first time i 've ever missed three , but life has been busy , busy , busy here are the highlights , lowlights , and a little of the in between i ran miles of the marathon course on sunday my leg held up okay after a week of swimming and rest my friend who missed qualifying for boston , by seconds , weeks ago qualified sunday with seconds to spare ! it was nice to be there on an almost perfect day being at the race , supporting my friends , and focusing on somebody other than me , me , me helped me feel better about not running i made the right decision it would have been painful and ugly if i had attempted the distance on my bum leg speaking of my bum leg , i finally saw the orthopedic doctor today my x rays were negative , no stress fracture that was the good news the doctor believed i had a stress reaction , which is the precursor to a fracture and apparently just as painful that was the bad news , because she does n't want me to run at all for the next three weeks ! i can hear all of you fellow runners gasping ! for the next three weeks , she wants me to walk only ! yuck ! i hate walking ! after three weeks , she thinks it will be okay to begin a walk run program she laid out a four month plan for my return to running ! i tried to smile and stay calm , but my brain was screaming , i do n't think sooooooo ! ! ! this is the point at which that damn twelve step program i follow starts tugging at my shirt tail whoa slow down , it says remember me ? remember ? living life on life 's terms , remember that one ? how about willingness ? what about listening to others who may , as unlikely as it may seem , know more than you ? how about not trying to control everything ? that damn twelve step program well , we 'll see i 'll keep swimming for the next couple of weeks , but i ca n't imagine i wo n't attempt to run just a bit as well but i 'll try to be good it is a tad ironic , perhaps cosmic , that the doc wants me to begin a walking program at the same time puck will need to begin a walking program i told you , i hate walking i love my dog , but i hate walking i was dreading having to walk puck a couple times a day , but now i'm going to be forced to walk myself ! hmmm there 's that damn twelve step program again my higher power taking control , intervening for my own good , despite myself ! puck gets his lamp shade collar off and staples out on friday i guess he and i will begin hobbling down the street together on saturday is n't recovery sweet ? ugh !