i'm about minutes away from missing my usual saturday morning meeting because i just could n't wake up this morning puck woke me up exceptionally early to go outside , and from that point on i could n't get any restful sleep i do n't like missing my meeting , but skipping every once in awhile wo n't kill me actually , i 'll be attending a special aa meeting tonight it 's cake night cake night celebrates everyone who had an anniversary in the previous month we each get a cake presented to us i chose my friend cindy to present mine not only is she a terrific friend , she was instrumental in getting me to aa and starting me on my sobriety trip the meeting is open to all family and friends , and it can often get quite emotional it 's a nice time for us to acknowledge the people who 've stuck with us or helped us in recovery unfortunately , i also have another commitment tonight ! go figure i rarely have anything going on , and tonight i have two important events at the same time ! the track club banquet is tonight this is an annual social event with dinner , speakers , and awards we also vote on club board members i happen to be running for one of the open board positions in addition , i'm due to get my award for winning my age group in the grand prix race series it 's a big night , but i'm going to miss most of it i 'll have to leave cake night early if i hope to hear any of the speaker or to arrive in time for the awards however , cake night may be so nice , i may choose not to leave it 's frustrating i 'd like to be at both events at the same time whichever event i attend , i should be in damn good shape ! today , i have a long challenging workout for my triathlon class my schedule calls for me to swim a long , tough interval workout it includes lots and lots of kicking just kicking i hate kicking ! by the time i reach the middle of the pool , all my momentum stops ! no matter how hard i kick , it seems i go nowhere ! it sucks ! i may cheat and bring my flippers after swimming more than yards , i 'll ride the bike for minutes boring ! i 'll be at the gym for at least two hours , i'm sure i guess i better get going ! on the job front , i did n't get any answers yesterday from my potential new employer she had n't looked into any of the details we were supposed to be working out , and she actually put me off until next week she apparently needs to consult with her big boss to get approval for some of the things i need in order to leave my current position so no news on whether or not i have a new job i 'll keep praying about it i have faith it will work out as it 's supposed to work out as soon as i know anything , i 'll let you know now , i better finish my coffee , get off my butt and get busy ! have a great day !