i can survive a tough , nasty , ugly run like the one i had yesterday because i 've survived thousands of tough , nasty , ugly days of depression the run yesterday did n't go well it was not what i was expecting nor wanting from the last long run before my marathon the gi distress had me stopped three times with little warning i was unprepared for that figuring the gels i was consuming were the possible culprit , i stopped using them and paid the price the last miles were a full on slog fest my legs were heavy from lack of nutrition my heart rate quickened i lost my breath there seemed no reason to move my brain screamed for relief just stop ! just stop ! who cares ? it does n't matter if you stop ! nobody will care if you stop ! deafened by the cacophony , i kept moving run to the next mailbox okay now , just to that telephone pole , it 's okay to stop once you get to that telephone pole okay just to the end of that building one monument one block one foot at a time i made it to the end miles i was dirty i smelled i hurt but i was still standing i persevered i persevered , because , as a person with depression , i 've learned to survive more than i ever thought i could i can survive a tough , nasty , ugly day of depression because i 've survived thousands of tough , nasty , ugly runs depression interferes with my goals planned days or events do n't go well they do n't turn out as i expected my brain disturbance stops me without warning i'm never prepared for that regardless of what i think may be the culprit , it always comes back to depression , and i pay the price the fatigue , irrational thinking , and hopelessness transforms the day into a full on slog fest my legs get heavy from lack of purpose my thoughts jumble and quicken into an irrational mess i lose my breath there seems no reason to move my brain screams for relief just stop ! just stop ! who cares ? it does n't matter if you stop ! nobody will care if you stop ! deafened by the cacophony , i keep moving move one foot onto the floor okay now , just go to the kitchen and feed puck it 's okay to stop once you feed puck okay now , just go to the bathroom , it 's okay to return to bed once you go to the bathroom okay now just eat something , anything you do n't have to do anything else once you eat something okay how about putting on some clothes ? just change into one clean thing one moment one step one foot at a time i 've made it to the end through the hour , through the day , through the week one foot at a time i 've been dirty i 've smelled i 've hurt but i 've remained standing i 've persevered i 've persevered , because , as a runner , i 've learned to survive more than i ever thought i could