only three days left until the big event my triathlon starts at am sunday morning i start right at in the first of three waves as usual during a taper week , i'm freaking out because i feel heavy the fact that it is my last week of work , i'm about to start a new job , i'm squeezing in extra obligations , and my triathlon suit 's zipper keeps breaking may have something to do with the freaking out as well ! i do n't know what do you think ? finishing at my current job has been bitter sweet upper management has barely lifted a finger to replace me , and my co workers expect to be swamped that makes me feel a little guilty i 'll miss working with my co workers , especially my assistant she 's pretty damn good we work cooperatively and have fun together i 'll miss that i wo n't miss the lazy , unfriendly nursing home staff , however good riddance ! and i certainly wo n't miss the drive like i said , leaving has been a bitter sweet process i have n't had too much time to be anxious about my new job yet i'm spending too much energy worrying about the triathlon i 've been running around trying to fit in extra obligations , which are required of me before i can start the new job for example , today i have to spend four hours getting my cpr re certification i'm hoping we do n't take the whole four hours that 's half my day ! i 've got other things to do ! i 've got to work out , go to the dentist , hit the track club board meeting , and exercise puck i'm hoping to get my workout done early this morning before cpr i'm scheduled to swim for minutes seems like a lot of swimming so close to the triathlon , but i probably need to burn a few extra calories so i 'll do it after swimming for that long , i may actually be able to focus on cpr as soon as i finish cpr , i 'll be off to the dentist i have another fractured tooth too much popcorn ! which we will try to save with a filling i'm losing my dental insurance with this new job , so i'm trying to get my dental work done now ! i pray i wo n't need another root canal ! perhaps i should seriously consider giving up popcorn this evening i have the track club board meeting , but i may not make it this month we 'll see how the rest of the day goes puck will need my attention , too as we say in minnesota , uff dah ! i 've got a busy day ahead ! i 'll have to say a little prayer , take it one moment at a time , and just work my way through it life is moving forward i 'll try to set my fears and worry aside and hang on for the ride ! wheeeeee have a great day !