note this post will make more sense if you read the preceding post first okay , i'm not one to make excuses usually , but now that i'm home , i 've had a few moments to reflect on my race , 'er lack of race , today one of the factors i was taking into account when i decided to drop out was how hard i seemed to be working for the pace i thought key word i was running i just figured out i ran the first miles way too fast ! in fact , of my miles today were significantly under pace ! here 's how that happened in my younger , faster , superstar joking ! ! days of running , i qualified for boston by running with a pace group so , i figured i 'd use the same strategy this time around the pacers are sponsored by clif bar , a sports nutrition company they assure you of running the pace you want to run without having to think and worry so much ! they carry balloons throughout the race so we runners can keep our pacer in sight there are pace runners for a wide variety of paces , starting at perhaps , , all the way up to over hours in five minute increments there were probably over of us following rachel , the pacer to run a , we needed to average per mile for the entire miles when i ran with a pace group previously , i remember feeling like we were running too fast in the early miles , so i did n't panic when i felt that way again today i am a slow to warm up runner , and i always feel better later in races than i do at the beginning nevertheless , i was struggling to keep up i tried to check my watch a couple times , but the rain made it impossible to read i figured the cold and rain were making everything feel more difficult , and they likely were , but i just reviewed my miles on my gps running watch rather than around per mile , we ran , , , , , , , no wonder i caught up to her during mile ! , , , and , at which point i was too frozen , soaked , and tired to continue we ran way too fast ! and running too fast early in a marathon has probably dashed more marathoner 's hopes than all the other excuses combined ! ugh ! i do n't begrudge rachel at all i do n't blame her at all she , like the rest of us , was miserable ! i did not envy her chore i hope she got as many of our group to the finish as possible there were many , many women attempting to qualify in the group i do wish i had trusted my own instincts more and worked harder to view my own damn watch in the long list of lessons today , this was another lesson learned in my next race , i will run my pace , pay attention to the messages my body is screaming at me , and use the pace group , if at all , as a guide , not god lesson number , , or there about i 've lost track