i think you can have no idea what it s like how can you ? unless you ve sat in this chair , early on a sunday , or monday , or tuesday morning , you cannot know what it s like to wake up feeling a sliver of hope that today will bring something different something new coffee , toast , dog fed , but then it settles in just that quick that sliver of hope is now a sharpened knife stabbing you in the chest with heavy , halting , excruciating glory that sliver was a tease those brief moments , they are just a tease already , i can hardly move do you have any idea how it feels to actually feel the weight of your own heart ? like a bowling ball settling low in my chest i m not sure how long i can support it these are the times your encouragement rings hollow do n't get me wrong , i need and want the encouragement , but at these times and i know what to do so easy , the suggestions are so simple why can t i just do one of them ? just do it ! one of them , do any one of them ! do something to combat this ! but depression is a cruel bully depression is a cruel , taunting bully ha , ha you thought you were better , but you re not here i am , already , so early in the morning you haven t even finished your coffee , and i ve already got you surrounded you can feel me closing in , can t you ? i feel best when you find breathing a chore you think you can read your e mail ? you think that magazine might be an option ? sit outside and take in the morning ? no way i won t allow it who do you think you are ? i ll tell you what , if you can lift the weight from your shoulders , unwrap the heavy layers of that leaden cloak , and somehow still support the sinking heart so low in your chest , go ahead give it your best shot but you don t deserve the attention span or energy for such things and if you think i m letting you go if you think i m allowing you to get off the mat ha that s a good one keep dreaming oh , sorry , i took your dreams a long time ago , too , didn t i ? i guess that settles it then i'm here to stay i think you can have no idea what it s like to feel so dark , and heavy , and so very alone so early on what looks to be a beautiful day to have hope squashed almost before the sun comes up and face living hours and hours of another day , with constant cruel bullying in my ear and at my side i just wish you knew what it was like i m not a bad person i m not lazy i m doing what i can , but right now what i can do is so very little , it seems as if i m not even trying and maybe i m not maybe i m not trying hard enough , but depression steals effort , too i am trying , but i'm not sure what else to do and i feel unable to do just about anything it s winning i m losing it 's here to stay maybe tomorrow maybe tomorrow will be different ?