i knew what she was going to tell me , and she did i had to pray for the sick man i could n't afford to be that angry anger that intense would stick with me it would tear me apart or drag me down i had to pray to god to relieve me of my anger at the sick man i was walking puck on our usual mile loop a couple nights ago he is a dog who appreciates routine we walk the same route every night he poops and pees in the same spots along the way during every walk it 's actually kind of funny even if he does n't have anything left in his tank , he 'll still stop to pee in the required spot nothing comes out , but he goes through the motions anyway makes me laugh every time ! you may be wondering why i am describing my dogs toileting habits to you let me explain puck 's first stop every night is just two houses down from me it is the home of an ish year old man named eugene his lawn is immaculate no trees , no flowers , no shrubs just perfect green grass puck likes the grassy area between the sidewalk and the street he makes his deposit , i immediately pick it up we 've been doing this for at least a year two nights ago , around pm , puck was making his deposit when a prolonged honk from a very loud horn came right at us from across the street after getting over my initial fright , i looked in the driver side window to see who the hell was being so obnoxious it was eugene he pulled into his driveway , about ten feet from us , and stopped without rolling down his window , he was screaming and pointing at us i could read his lips you pick that f kin' shit up ! you pick that f kin' shit up ! picture this i was standing over my dog , who had n't even finished his business yet , with a white plastic grocery bag pulled up to my elbow on my right hand i had another bag folded up in my other hand stunned , i stretched out my arms , faced eugene and said , what the f k ? i figured if he could cuss like a sailor so could i i was shocked could this man not see the plastic bag up to my elbow ? ? i stood there looking at him , still in his car with the window rolled up , as he began flipping me off and repeatedly saying , f k you f k you f k you i must have looked like an idiot standing there , stunned , mouth agape with a white plastic bag up to my elbow but i just could n't believe what was happening , and i was getting really pissed off finally , i yelled , what is the problem ? this got eugene out of his car give me that f kin' bag , he hissed , as he walked toward me again , i asked , what is your problem ? he again told me to pick that shit up , and i said , what do you think i'm doing ? i bent over to pick up the f kin' shit i was thoroughly confused as to why i was being attacked i told him he was acting like an asshole , and then i asked him if he realized i was his neighbor ? at that , he softened a bit , and said , ya , i see you running around here i do n't think he really realized who he was screaming at , not that it should make any difference if i was his neighbor or not ! i picked up the poop , as he walked away mumbling about getting his hose i was seething , but i turned and as pleasantly as possible said , you have a nice night ! he did n't acknowledge me i fumed throughout our entire walk i came up with a million zingers i should have said i thought about throwing dog poop at his house on our way home in the end , i knew i could n't do or say any of what i was thinking instead , i came home and called my sponsor i knew what she was going to tell me , and she did i prayed for the sick man it worked