i wish this was going to be a nice , sunny essay about how brilliantly i deal with frustration , but i'm afraid it may turn into more of a puffed up rant ! i 've had a week filled with frustration it 's been challenging i 've tried to handle it all with a modicum of grace have i been successful ? i do n't know see what you think my most immediate frustration is my screwed up internet connection it 's been goofed up off and on for almost one week ! this situation frustrates me immensely ! it may be because i know little about the inner workings of computers and internet connectivity lack of knowledge , i find , quickly increases my frustration quotient knowing little means i had to call the dreaded tech support people in india does anyone else get frustrated when they ca n't understand what 's being said to them ? after what seemed like an hour , the overly polite tech supporter helped me fix the problem beautiful ! i was extremely grateful unfortunately , the fix did n't last every time i 've awoken my sleeping computer since then i 've encountered the same problem sometimes i could fix it , sometimes i could n't after wishing the problem away without success , i had to return to tech support today i was told , we 're updating your server in other words , i 've just got to deal with it and trust it will be taken care of soon that 's difficult for me to do , but i'm trying on a totally separate front , i had a softball game last night as usual , we got creamed perhaps you 've guessed , but i am a fairly competitive person therefore , getting smacked down on the softball field is quite frustrating do n't get me wrong , i can play for fun and recreation , which is what i thought i was getting myself into when i joined this team however , i have trouble with lack of effort , indifference , and unfamiliarity with basic rules it is a team sport , but only half of our team understands the game or how to use a glove that 's a bit more recreational than the other teams in our league , as scores like and attest i wanted to have fun i'm instead finding frustration those are just two examples of my frustrations this week i'm not even going to get into the massive paperwork screw up i made at work yesterday ! as we say in minnesota , uff dah ! the good news , because my therapist always tells me to look at the positive , was that i was able to handle these frustrations with a bit more grace than i would have years ago at work , i bit my tongue , apologized , and fixed the problem the best i could i had to bite my tongue because my old habit of blaming someone else for my screw up was gurgling up inside i did n't blame anyone i swallowed my pride i took the blame , and i fixed it on the softball field it would have been easy to blame , but there was no point in that what i really wanted to do was walk off the field in a huff how childish is that ? ! yet , i may have done just that in the past god , that 's awful to admit ! but i did n't storm off i stayed i played my best , and i offered instruction and encouragement where i could i was n't happy with the result , but i was n't an asshole either improvement speaking of improvement years ago i would have chewed out those tech supporters instead of getting help , i would have gotten high blood pressure ! yelling is a lot easier than acceptance i have no control over these 'server updating' issues , and that 's difficult to accept but by accepting reality , rather than trying to manipulate it , my life stays simpler i am still frustrated i do n't necessarily like the reality , but at least i can sit comfortably with myself i'm not sure what all of this means it 's been a challenging week i'm not a fan of frustration it 's an uncomfortable feeling yet , i feel i 've met it with some success this week and eventually , things will have to get easier , right ? at least , that 's what my therapist tells me