my load of stuff has been lightened significantly my pocket is full of cash and thank god , it 's done ! my garage sale is officially over i'm pretty sure i wo n't do it again ! it was a lot of work it rained on us once it was hot and humid otherwise a group of men came in a bunch and stole some electronics we sold a lot to many families in need for example , one family bought pairs of my old running shoes ! i hurt my mom 's feelings more on that in a later post at closing , we stocked up a young couple with several hundred dollars of free stuff for their new pad and the salvation army is much richer this morning wow ! what an interesting , exhausting weekend i'm not sure where to start again , i could n't believe how much stuff i had accumulated my driveway and garage were crowded with things , upon things , upon things then , just to make it more interesting , my friends bill and cindy arrived with three truckloads full of their belongings it just occurred to me i really should have taken some pictures ! long story short we were loaded with stuff the first day , with the exception of minutes of rain , was long , hot , and fairly steady i was outside setting up by am for a sale scheduled to begin at noon we made our first sale at am crazy ! we finally packed up by or pm , and then we all went out for a huge meal and pie my diet really suffered this weekend ! yesterday was more of the same we went from am through pm it was busier and hotter than friday by the end of the day , we were practically giving things away actually , we did give things away i looked around at , and even though more than half of the bounty was gone , i realized i was going to be hauling an awful lot of stuff to salvation army if i did n't get busy letting stuff go ! we all went into everything must go , mode at , a very young couple drove up they walked through as they were heading back to their car , cindy asked , what do you need ? she started , literally , shoving things into their arms how about sheets ? do you need some sheets ? she pushed sheets at them they smiled sheepishly we found out they were just setting up their small pad oh my ! that was all we needed to hear ! we told them , take whatever you want ! please ! initially they were shy , but by the time they left we had them stocked with a new futon , a thermarest sleeping pad , two pillows , two sets of sheets , several blankets and throws , a comforter , two duvets to cover the out of date comforter , a clock , a beautiful candle , a lamp , an lcd monitor tv , and several other items i can no longer remember with the exception of the monitor , we gave them everything , free ! it was so fun ! i think they were happy they stopped ! shortly after that fun , we began packing up by the time we finished , it was again time for a big meal and good dessert i treated my mom and step dad to their meal for all the help they provided over the weekend , especially since they barely sold enough to make half their time worthwhile after dinner , i barely had enough energy to make it to bed this morning , i 've arisen to a messy , disorganized home but it 's an emptier home , and that 's fantastic ! i have floor space i have n't seen since i bought this place years ago ! i love it ! i'm going to re commit to better eating , begin exercising again , and figure out what to do with all this extra space ! for awhile , though , i may just enjoy the emptiness ! carry on , friends !