well , it 's all over but the running i'm sitting here bored in my hotel room my class ended at noon today i then braved the masses at the marathon expo in order to pick up my number as i expected , there were thousands of people milling about for those of you who do n't know , marathons are preceeded by day large expos where vendors from clothing manufacturers , to mattress dealers , to chiropractors hawk their wares there are deals to be had , drawings to enter , and tons of energy foods and drinks to sample i love them , but i usually try to go at off peak times noon the day before the race is not an off peak time i could barely squeeze my way through the isles of the convention center today perhaps that 's why i got out of there having only spent ten dollars ! i usually over spend my wallet ! so there 's nothing else to do now but wait since i had some gi distress on my long runs , i am a bit anxious about that component i 've been extremely careful with my eating and drinking the past days hopefully i 've protected myself if i'm going to qualify for boston , i ca n't spend precious time in the port a potties ! as far as qualifying goes , i realized a short time ago that i really have no idea what to expect tomorrow it 's been a long time since i 've trained this diligently and intently for a marathon , and yet i only trained , rather than my usual , weeks will that come back to haunt me ? another thing it appears it 's going to rain tomorrow not ideal conditions , and i'm not sure if my planned attire will keep me both warm enough and cool enough i do n't mind running in the rain , but it 's another unknown wrinkle and then there 's my fragile hip it 's been fine , but again oh damn ! i think i 've spent too much time alone in this hotel room ! ! gotta love the marathon ! this is part of the mystique of running miles you never know what to expect , and over the course of hours a lot can happen and change ! i'm as ready as i can be in honor of jeannie , i'm running with my aa white chip the day one , surrender chip and my year medallion i typically carry them with me everyday , though not usually on runs i guess i think they 'll offer me some extra security tomorrow jeannie will be with me i will think of her every time i hear them jangle in my pocket jeannie will be smiling whether i qualify or barely make it to the finish line ! in the grand scheme of things , this will be but one moment in my life i'm going to enjoy it , regardless of the outcome jeannie taught me that