anger is not a four letter word but nobody likes it when i'm angry i 've been angry , at times really angry , over these last few weeks i 've been angry at depression angry at what it takes from me , angry at how much it limits what i can think , feel and do , and yes , angry at the unfairness of it all unfairness is not a place i usually go , but what can i say ? i'm human i'm human but not superhuman sometimes i get angry i want to punch , kick , fight , and scream i say bad words and call depression unkind names i think it makes perfect sense to be angry i do n't think it 's bad or taboo , yet anger makes many people very uncomfortable with the exception of my therapist , who usually says something kind like , i get that , most people change the subject or try to talk me out of my anger why ? does n't anger make sense to you ? would n't you be angry , too , if your life was periodically hijacked by an out of control , physically and mentally life sucking illness which changes the very nature of who you are ? is n't it unkind to lose , through no fault of your own , that for which you 've so diligently worked ? would n't it piss you off , just a bit , to suddenly be unable to work , to earn a living , and to watch your finances shrink ? all of that time , effort , and education for what ? this ? this is not what i worked so hard to get , and that angers me would n't you find it maddening to have your brain hijacked by unforgiving , dark thoughts , too scary to share , to feel isolated and alone , to have extreme difficulty socializing ? of course i'm angry ! and for you to respond to my anger with fear , which is usually followed by suggestions beginning with , well , if you just did 'xyz' you 'd feel better , is not helpful that would be nice , but that 's not how depression works depression does n't make sense half the time i do n't understand it , so i do n't expect you to understand it either that 's not what i'm asking depression is a frustrating conglomeration of symptoms which often change from one day to the next it 's messy , and ugly , and demanding , and scary i think it makes perfect sense to be angry sometimes it even feels good to be angry anger requires emotional energy , something depression rarely lets me have anger is not a four letter word it 's a normal human emotion to having something , in this case life as i knew it , stolen from me do n't let my anger frighten you please and do n't try to talk me out of it either be honest try , i get that , or even , i do n't get it , but you can tell me anyway i 'd rather that than useless , feel good suggestions which may placate you but leave me feeling discounted and alienated let me talk about it it 's okay if i'm angry i wish it did n't distress people so much