since a few of you have asked puck is doing very well as i said earlier , his pain seems better controlled this time around he is able to put weight on his operated leg already he 's figured out how to lie down and get back up without hurting himself , crying , or making his mom cringe ! last night , he even picked up his hotdog a stuffed hot dog given to him after his first surgery and wanted to play believe it or not , there are actually two silver linings here first , puck had n't yet fully recovered his range of motion or strength in his previously operated knee he still favored that leg , although i think this was more out of habit than true weakness , and he did not have full knee flexion which altered his gait as a result of this surgery , he is being forced to use that leg and knee , which should break his habitual movement patterns and improve his strength ironically , the other silver lining is due to those habitual movement patterns and poor strength because he had not fully regained stability , strength and range of motion in his previously operated leg , he is also being forced to use his current bad leg more ! thus , he 's already weight bearing on it , and he 's already bending and straightening it more than he ever did with the first one as a result , i think he will maintain more strength and motion in this leg both of his hind legs may be improved by the time he heals from this surgery ! two silver linings to an otherwise horrible situation imagine that ! as for the runner , 'er , me , things are a bit more gray i made a choice not to run at all this week the combination of fatigue and right shin pain were inhibiting my motivation primarily , i was hoping some time off the road would improve my leg i ca n't hope to finish a marathon if i have pain with every step so , i hit the pool and the bike the good news is the pool was kind i had n't forgotten how to swim laps , although i'm sure i do n't have the prettiest stroke in the pool ! i bullied out one mile two or three times , and then last night did my long run in the water after a long , sleepy day , i entered the pool without a plan as i hopped into the water i decided to swim a ladder , , , , , , yards with breaths in between each swim do n't ask me why i decided to do that it sounded like a challenging workout that would take awhile ! it did take awhile , but by the end of the first i was thinking , you idiot ! nevertheless , i persevered through all the negative mind games , and i did it ! in fact , i must have been brain dead after the second because i swam a final rather than the i had planned ! needless to say , i was pretty happy with myself ! later , i figured it out i swam miles in approximately one hour and fifteen minutes i believe minutes and just over mile were previously my longest swims ! hmmm i wonder why my shoulder is sore today ? ? so where does all of this leave me ? oh , i do n't know ! ! the marathon is next sunday lots of locals are running it , so i would like to give it a shot however , i do n't want to do more damage than good to my leg or my psyche i'm worried about puck he needs almost constant attention these first couple weeks i'm concerned about the weather it 's getting cold here ! and finally , i'm afraid of not qualifying , which is the all time poorest excuse not to run in fact , if that were my only excuse , i would definitely have to push through it ! bottom line , i need to make a decision ! i just need to make a decision as usual , i 'll let you know