i went into the us bank in stillwater , mn to pay my mortgage a few days ago i had some cash and a couple checks to put toward the mortgage never got to the bank to deposit them , so thought i 'd just skip the step and put them toward the mortgage directly i planned to pay the remainder of the mortgage , minus the cash and checks , with a personal check unfortunately , i entered the bank right after my hip injection last week i apparently was a bit stressed and preoccupied after the painful injection , because i missed a huge error made by the teller she failed to credit me for all of the cash and checks ! in fact , she shorted me ! fifty bucks ! maybe that 's not a lot of money to some of you , but it 's a pretty big deal to me ! to make matters worse , i did n't notice the error for two days according to my receipt , my mortgage was credited for the proper amount , so either the teller slipped into her pocket , threw one of my checks in the trash , or just screwed up ! i prefer to give people the benefit of the doubt , so i'm assuming it was an innocent mistake , and if it was it should be simple to fix , right ? the bank teller 's drawer would have been over her receipts at the end of the day one phone call from a customer stating they were shorted on that particular day i mean , put two and two together ! teller drawer bucks , customer bucks equals a pretty simple fix makes sense , does n't it ? i thought so , too the thing is , getting someone to even look into it seems to be a major problem for us bank once i noticed the error , i did an internet search to locate the bank branch and phone number it was too early to phone , so i wrote an e mail to us bank via their customer service website the website promised a response within hours they do n't promise a resolution , just a response i followed my e mail with a phone call directly to the bank branch as soon as they opened the female employee who took my call told me she would get back to me in a few minutes that was nearly hours ago in the meantime , us bank responded to my e mail and said they were referring me to the mortgage division oh boy , i thought , here we go i responded to us bank 's e mail , re explaining the situation and stating that i thought the bank branch likely had the extra i did n't believe the mortgage division would be able to assist me remember , i had n't actually overpaid my mortgage my mortgage was credited with the correct amount , even though i had actually given the teller more than i owed on my mortgage tonight , the saga continued i received another e mail response from us bank stating that because i do n't have an account number they can refer to i need to contact the bank branch directly i'm not sure what this e mail means i do n't have a checking or savings account at us bank , just my mortgage but why does a customer need an account number for us bank to research that customer losing ? ! so i just finished my third e mail back to us bank i informed them i had already contacted the local bank branch without resolution and asked them to please stop passing me around ! as far as i can tell , nobody has actually lifted a finger to look into the matter ! yup , us bank has responded , but every response has directed me to seek assistance elsewhere ! nice this seems to be a typical customer service tactic has anyone else noticed this ? it seems most customer service departments play a war of attrition with their complainants customer service passes the victim around until the customer 's complaint , problem or loss becomes less bothersome than the process of remediation ! i'm sorry i ca n't help you go repeat your story to another department i'm sorry i ca n't help you go repeat your story to another person i'm sorry i ca n't help you go repeat your story to another office and on , and on , and on until the customer is so fed up , frustrated and exasperated , they ca n't stand it anymore ! the customer eventually gives up problem solved through attrition the last man standing , customer service , won , but no one ever addressed the original issue i fear i am now engaged in this attrition war with us bank ! the only action which seems to have been taken has been to refer me elsewhere what a waste of time and energy ! why ca n't someone just look into the problem ? look at the receipts look at the video tapes banks have video surveillance , right ? this could have been resolved with one simple phone call if someone actually took some action ! ! but , no , that would make too much sense that would mean someone might have to admit there was a mistake ! what ever happened to customer service ? i do n't think i like what 's become of it soon , i 'll need to decide whether to keep pursuing this or let it go i guess i'm about to find out how much sanity i'm willing to sacrifice for bucks wish me luck