fear i 've written about that big ugly word previously is it just those of us with mental illness and addiction that experience it so acutely ? or is it experienced by normies , too ? and by experienced , i mean do they feel it to such a degree as to control their behavior ? i lost my opportunity at normie hood long ago , so i guess i will never know i am sitting here reflecting on fear again because i just made another business call my business requires that i put myself out there and interact with people , ask them for their time , and then ask them to join me i sacrifice massive amounts of energy performing each of these important tasks every time i put myself out there , i just barely hold back my fear picture me with my back to an almost closed door , rapidly speaking so as to finish before i weaken and fear busts into the room that 's me every time i make a phone call , meet someone for coffee , or speak to someone about my business yet , i love my business , my product , my potential ! so you 'd think it would get easier ! but it 's not what 's up with that ? i figured if i kept pushing against it , the fear would lessen , but it has n't why ? why bother pushing myself if the discomfort does not lessen ? where 's the reward in that ? it would be like training for a marathon , and feeling just as crappy on day as i did on day one ! who 'd be dumb enough to continue if that were the case ? if there 's no change , no reward for the effort , why continue to push ? hope ? maybe next time it will be better ? sounds like an alcoholic rationalizing some controlled drinking to me ! interesting so what is it with fear ? why is it so powerful ? fear humbles me , that 's for sure nothing like a single dose of big , ugly fear to knock me down a notch ! is that the lesson ? is that the intended result i have not been able to see ? humility ? perhaps by walking through my fear , i expected mastery , confidence and control i have consistently received insecurity , discomfort and humility i think i may have just answered a lot of my questions