parts of the following post were taken from a post i wrote on , which was also about dating being a recovering alcoholic and person with depression , i do n't find the bar scene too inviting so , i met a man online , and we had a date tonight here 's the problem , the question , the conundrum when do i drop the d bomb on the guy ? he thinks i'm swell smart , funny , charming , sexy , blah , blah , blah but just how sweet , charming and sexy will i be when i add depression to my list of attributes ? how about chronic , debilitating , treatment resistant , do n't have enough energy to brush my teeth depression ? charming ? sexy ? sweet ? i do n't think so ! this is such an anxiety producing dilemma for me tonight , i let this guy get to know me up to a point he does n't realize i come with a catch i do n't feel like i was honest nor totally dishonest with this very nice man in fact , this whole process is painfully bittersweet so far , this guy has gotten to know the person i used to be i can still be that person , but only occasionally and for short periods of time in reality , i no longer am that person it 's just an old , familiar role and as i found out tonight , it 's a whole lot easier to play the role via e mail than in person in person , it takes a lot of energy to play the role of me the me i used to be me minus depression if i act the part for for too long it absolutely wipes me out at some point , i have to tell this guy i like him he likes me will he also like me the me with depression ? it 's ridiculous , really ! obviously , if he ca n't handle it he 's not a person i want to be associated with but if not him , who ? major depression is not a selling point ! depression is just one more thing that is wrong with me i'm tired of having something wrong with me i'm tired of having to explain what 's wrong with me sometimes i wish i could go back to being me the me without conditions , precautions or excuses but then again , maybe he would n't like the old me looking back , i do n't like the old me in most ways the new me even the new me with depression is a lot better person