the worst part about any running layoff is starting up again one run here and there feels good , but once i start back a bit more seriously , it sucks ! for example , i ran christmas morning prior to visiting with my family i did n't realize until we were out and away from the hotel that it was actually degrees outside ! ! despite that , and because of that , i ran quickly through the cold i felt good i marveled at puck 's frosty goatee and laughed when my eye lashes began to freeze call me crazy , but it was fun that was two days ago thinking ahead to the upcoming racing season and my still unfulfilled boston goal , i ran again today it sucked ! it sucked like all other returns to running have sucked i hate it ! does this happen to anyone else out there ? today , as in other returns previously , nothing felt fluid or coordinated my lungs felt stiff unable to expand enough to fulfill their oxygen requirements i was short of breath way too soon at a pace which should have been way too slow my high heart rate bugged me again that one really pisses me off ! if i did n't have to take these damn meds to stay somewhat sane , i would n't have to strain at the upper end of my heart 's capability again at a much too slow pace for such a high heart rate ! i ran three miles it felt like ten , and my heart rate monitor screamed , slow down , slow down , half the time ! feeling this poorly , doing something which used to feel so easy , reminds me of several humbling realities of which i am not fond i'm getting older and therefore require more time and energy to run and to recover i'm a little heavier and therefore slower i have depression and therefore require meds with unpleasant side effects i require meds with side effects which directly impair my running and racing ability in summary , i am older , heavier , and taking medication to control a chronic illness each factor by itself has the power to slow even the most competitive runner , which i am not combined , these humbling realities remind me i need to practice acceptance acceptance seems to have been a theme this week okay , i 'll work on acceptance of my current reality , but that does n't mean i have to like it ! i still hate getting back to running it 's difficult , and i prefer easy but i also know today 's difficulty will be tomorrow 's reward hmmm in that case , i ca n't wait until tomorrow ! it 's much easier to accept easy than it is difficult