over the past few days , i have learned that there are , within any hour period , several hundred thousand people searching for the following how to overcome depression depression how to overcome it how to defeat depression how to beat depression how to get over depression how to survive depression depression how to get over it depression how to find out you have it how to know if you have depression a short quiz to know you have depression how to find tests for depression free online tests for depression how to live with depression how to live with a teenager with depression how to live with a spouse with depression how to help someone with depression and finally , there are thousands of others looking for online chat rooms for depression and anxiety wow ! does anyone see a theme here ? just as interesting , i found there are an abundance of web sites purporting to answer these questions or is it really just one question in multiple forms ? my question is , do they ? do the , sites already available answer the above questions ? can people be helped , and helped appropriately , through online searches ? obviously , i hope so besides their common theme , another thing about these searches grabbed my attention the terms people used the search terminology used actually disturbs me quite a bit why are people going to the internet to find out if they have depression , and how to get over it ? did you notice nobody was looking for a cure ? here we have a biological , treatable condition that people want to get over i wonder if there are any searches being done on how to get over cancer ? i wonder if anyone is marketing a short quiz to cancer patients ? can you imagine ? why is it okay to seek expert md diagnosis for possible cancer , but self analysis through an online short quiz is preferred for probable depression ? stigma and what do you do once your short quiz reveals the terrible truth ? it is depression now what ? does the short quiz direct you to a short md for a short cure ? stigma because of stigma , percent of all mental illnesses go undiagnosed , and undiagnosed depression is the number one cause of suicide stigma allows health insurance companies to limit coverage for mental illnesses , so even the diagnosed go untreated mentally ill individuals are fired from their jobs because of stigma and it is stigma that leads suffering individuals to search for diagnosis and treatment online rather than in a doctor 's office