i am selling my car why ? because i bought a new one ! this is a big deal i 've had my current car for years i bought it brand new , and i 've been the sole driver ever since it 's a saturn sc , and i just took it past , miles i put a very fair price on it , and people have been coming out of the woodwork in fact , i sold it today , but then i realized i needed it for a few more days , as i wo n't have my new one until tuesday ! dah ! unfortunately , when i told the young man buyer this news , the deal no longer worked for him i have at least three people coming to look at it tomorrow i expect it will sell i'm going to be sad to see it go this car has been through quite a journey with me , and it 's treated me very kindly it 's funny how a person can get attached to something like a car i actually want it to go to a good home somebody who will take care of it is n't that a bit silly ? anyway , i bought a toyota highlander with , miles on it it 's gorgeous , loaded , and big enough to carry my bike and my dog at the same time ! unfortunately , in order to keep my payment as low as possible , i'm also selling my motorcycle my honda shadow has also been kind to me i 'll miss it , but i just do n't ride it enough to make it worthwhile i 'd rather spend my time and money on my bicycle , i guess so i 've been busy around here i had to clean up my car and motorcycle so they 'd shine that was a bit of work for my very dirty car i 've also been cleaning out my house , as i plan to have a large garage sale in a couple weeks i 've got so much stuff that i never use , or that does n't fit me anymore , or that i just no longer want , it 's ridiculous ! i'm feeling weighted down by excess stuff i want to get rid of it all ! preparing for the sale , however , is also going to be a lot of work speaking of work , things are quite busy there now , too i worked hours on wednesday i 've got two patients in a town one hour and ten minutes away now by the time i drive there , treat both of them , and drive back , half of my day is gone but i do n't mind one bit and soon , i 'll be driving that in my new vehicle ! hee , hee life 's busy i'm busy things are going well i'm not doing a lot of exercising , but right now i'm okay following the weight watchers plan helps me feel less panicky about not training i do hope things settle just a bit , however , because i 'd like to get back on my bike well , i better get back to it that laundry wo n't fold itself ! take care everyone !