it s day two of my personal revolution we re talking yoga , journaling , food diary , meditation , water , and more yoga ! for some reason , i decided it would be a grand idea to sign up for this intensive course , which is being offered through the dan abraham healthy living center the health club associated with my employer just for chuckles , following is the opportunity which i just couldn t pass up ! yoga from am every monday through friday and am on saturdays studying the book , days to a personal revolution completing the very personal journaling assignments in the book and as instructed meditating for at least minutes twice per day writing down every single thing i put into my mouth throughout each day drinking at least ounces of water per day no eating at all after dinner each night performing leg lifts every single night performing at least minutes of yoga on my own every sunday i ve made it to yoga and just so we re clear this is not gentle yoga the last two mornings getting up at am is quite a major adjustment to my routine ! getting up , performing yoga , and then working a full day is an even bigger adjustment ! committing to anything this significant ? unheard of since the onset of my illness but i committed , so i am going to try my best i think i will appreciate the focus on my eating , which i tend to do mindlessly and without regard to portion size writing down what i m putting into my body should help me make better , and smaller , choices my physical and mental well being should improve as my eating improves i know i will appreciate the yoga strengthening , flexibility , balance and stability are the tenets of yoga and the foundation of better running i look forward to my running improving with my body over the next days meditation is the tough one i hate it ten minutes is a long , long time in this anxious , thoughtful brain ! ten minutes twice per day ? ugh ! i made it minutes once yesterday if i come through this able to meditate , we ll have to consider it a miracle ! there could be no better endorsement for this program than that ! i ll keep you all updated as i go along wish me luck !