consumer who 's idea was that ? when did patient become a four letter word ? and why is it only a four letter word for me , a person with depression , but not for my neighbor with cancer ? please do not call me a consumer ! when i am in line at starbucks , i am a consumer shopping at wal mart i am a consumer but while conversing with my doctor , i am a patient ! who came up with this idea that we were not patients , not people with an illness , but consumers ? brilliant while i stand in front of classrooms enlightening the charges that mental illness is no different than cancer , ms , or any other illness , someone somewhere decided that it would be too stigmatizing ? to call us patients ? people ? in an effort to make us less different , we just rocketed ourselves into another plane of difference ! how can we say we are the same , but please don t call us the same ? we have a biological , treatable illness , but the word patient is pejorative ? cancer patient , woman with ms , guy with heart disease no problem , it is okay for them but we are different we , those of us with depression , schizophrenia , and eating disorders , have an illness just like they do , but please don t refer to us in the same way we are not patients we are consumers huh ? consumer ? talk about stigmatizing ! ! i have a biological brain disease ! when i am hospitalized , i am not there to choose between a green gown or a blue gown i am there because my symptoms have gotten worse , and i need specialized medical care to manage my illness this is true whether i have appendicitis , scoliosis , diabetes , or depression ! all are illnesses that may lead to death if we do not allow ourselves to be treated , to be patients i am a person with a mental illness while visiting my psychiatrist , i am her patient while visiting my psychologist , i am her patient while getting my blood drawn , having an mri or getting an ekg , i am a patient regardless of my diagnosis , when getting treatment , i am a patient why , if the diagnosis is depression , undergoing the same tests and treatment , must i be a consumer ? we can t have it both ways if our premise and platform is that we have biological , treatable illnesses , just like everybody else , how can we define patient as a stigmatizing word ? we can t have it both ways we can t fight for research dollars we can t educate the school children we can t demand equal insurance coverage we can t reduce stigma we can t align ourselves with other biological , treatable illnesses if we continue to separate ourselves by denying our status as patients we ca n't have it both ways choosing between ajax and comet ? consumer choosing between prozac and paxil ? patient