this is a post i wrote last year , but it 's so appropriate right now i thought i 'd re run it conversation with my brain today i learned more than i wanted or needed to know about the female menstrual cycle what does that have to do with you , you ask ? i'm getting to that it seems you and at least one female hormone share a particular affinity for a crucial neurotransmitter you know the hormone family , do n't you ? sure you do ! they 're okay one on one or even in small groups , but once a month they invite all of those loud relatives from god knows where and party like there 's no tomorrow ! yes , see , i knew you 'd heard them before ! in fact , did n't they just leave a few days ago ? my god ! seems like they were on an extended stay this month , did n't it ? they really wear me out with all that revelry ! so much activity stresses me out , you know i get headaches , and backaches , and downright irritable hard to be a good neighbor with all that going on anyway , what was i saying , brain ? oh yes , you and that female hormone well , i know how much you value your serotonin , brain but it 's actually my serotonin , remember ? you 're just supposed to be caring for it yes , yes , i know you care for it ! but you know how they say if you love something you should set it free ? yup , you 're supposed to let it go ! that 's what the saying means setting it free is part of caring for it if you care , you 'll set my serotonin free , brain no , i am not implying you are selfish ! yes , i realize you are working on letting go , and i appreciate that i know you 've even let go of a smidgen extra serotonin recently , and that 's just great ! but we 've got to get to a point of regular letting go , routine letting go remember , sharing is caring ! i know i know you 're worried if you let it go , serotonin may be up and taken from you but do n't you realize how sad i feel when you hang on so tight ? in fact , when you hoard my serotonin , sometimes i feel just like i did last week when the hormones were in town irritable , sad , heavy , and slow i feel just like i did wait a minute ! that 's it ! of course ! that makes perfect sense ! ! what ? oh , sorry , brain i was having one of those light bulb moments hey , are n't you supposed to be in on those ? as i was saying , brain , you and this hormone chick seem to share a particular affinity for my serotonin ! so it makes perfect sense , when she 's here rockin' out with the rest of her clan , i feel like crap ! and it makes perfect sense , when you selfishly care for my serotonin , i also feel like crap ! and here 's the kicker , if progesterone hormone that 's her name , i guess happens to be visiting at the same time as you happen to be hoarding my serotonin , i feel like double triple crap ! ! so what do you think of that , le brain ? well ? what am i going to do about it ? no , you 're right , i really ca n't expect the progesterone bunch wo n't come i could ask , but i'm sure they 'll show up anyway it 's gotten to the point where i can almost feel them coming once a month , just like clockwork , miss progesterone and her entire rowdy clan roll in ! and i heard they arrive even more pronounced in their middle years , although maybe with less regularity hmmm does n't seem right they should n't be allowed to interfere with my life so much ! they must get old and tired sometime , do n't you think ? perhaps then they 'll stay home but what about you , brain ? you 've got to shape up ! let my serotonin go ! i'm not going to put up with your bs anymore yes , i did call you selfish i'm sorry about that , but if the shoe fits it 's time for you to grow up , to see the bigger picture it 's not all about you ! what about me , brain ? do n't you see ? when you hang onto my serotonin , i feel sad and tired but when you let go , i feel better and if i feel better , i can stimulate you with a lot more interesting stuff ! see ? it 's a win win situation ! so , whadaya say ? will you let my serotonin go ? please , brain , let my serotonin go