up , down , in , out breathe , breathe ! dogs and cobras and swans dead bugs , pigeons and camels thunderbolts and warriors sun salutes and prayer twists prayer twist that one comes with the instruction , ring out your guts twist from the base of your spine all the way up squeeze every internal organ you 've got geez , i thought yoga was supposed to be kind and gentle ! i was mistaken it 's day nine of my days of yoga personal revolution class not only am i learning all kinds of interesting lingo , i m sore as hell ! well , okay , maybe only sore as heck it s likely half of my soreness is from shoveling drifts of snow after yesterday s blizzard but i digress so far , i m pretty amazed sore , but amazed i thought getting up at every morning would just about kill me i ve actually tolerated it quite well , especially when one considers it was degress this morning ! undertaking this endeavor in january in minnesota certainly makes it more challenging , but doing the yoga seems to energize my entire day i do catch a nap if i can , but even when i can t , i survive i thought maintaining a food journal would be a waste of time it hasn t been ! i ve already cut down my portion sizes by actually measuring servings of food like cereal ! , and i m making better food choices , too i thought forgoing food after dinner would leave me starving it hasn t while i got hungry and chose to snack times last week , i again made tiny choices in comparison to what i would have eaten the week before i m talking saltines and chocolate milk vs ice cream and chocolate chip cookies ! big difference , don t you think ? and i thought meditating on my own time , twice per day , would really , really suck okay , so far , it has ! progress not perfection progress not perfection progress not perfection i m still working on that one ! one very pleasant surprise the book we are using and the yogis running the course seem nicely aligned with the twelve steps it s quite a unique experience to be in a room full of normies , with a few exceptions , and have the yogi recite the serenity prayer during the ending meditation she also sprinkles in quotes from the program , like progress not perfection , and we can do what i cannot i love it the book is centered around the twelve laws of transformation hmmmm i m sensing a theme here ! i guess , as they say , this is right where i need to be , and right when i need to be here i ll keep you posted !