depression disabled me i was unable to work , even unable to care for myself at times things have been getting a little better , and a little better , and a little better over the last several months i have n't been in the hospital for over one year , the longest freedom tenure since this odyssey began eight years ago yes , eight years now eight years ago this month , november , my new , uninvited life began it 's been a long road but now , i am looking at going back to work i have been working on call for years , but i'm talking about going back to a regularly scheduled , part time position fortunately , physical therapists are in high demand unfortunately , most healthcare organizations no longer hire part time employees it 's too expensive to provide part timers with benefits , i guess that 's not the point , however the point is , i'm looking at going back to work , and this is big deal ! it 's big , and it 's frightening i 've had a few phone interviews already , and i have an interview with a local pt office tomorrow it sounds like they may be open to part time employment , although i do n't know if that would include benefits i 'd certainly like health benefits i'm sure many of you understand when i say living with a chronic illness , without benefits , is also scary i kind of enjoy the interviews they do n't scare me i 've found a new , relaxed attitude during the interviews i 've already done with what i 've gone through these past eight years , my perspective has obviously changed i'm not perfect , but neither are they they are either going to like me or not i'm either going to think the position or employer will be a good fit or not i'm not desperate i know i can live on very little income i 've been doing it for at least of the last years ! i also know if i accept a position which is n't right , i 'll set myself up for failure i do n't want to fail failure scares me ! the possibility of failure is frightening when i worry about failing , my thoughts race what if i get in over my head ? what if i ca n't tolerate even part time employment ? what if i ca n't manage the stress of a new job , new co workers , new patients , more responsibility , and more scheduled time ? what if that stress increases my fatigue ? what if that fatigue keeps me from doing the other activities which keep me stable ? what if losing my balance and stability leads to increased depression symptoms ? what if a depression relapse disables me again and keeps me from working ? whew ! ! thinking is frightening therefore , i'm trying not to think there is a lot of uncertainty ahead i hate uncertainty i have no idea what is , or is not , going to happen clearly , thinking about all of the negative possibilities does not help ! i'm trying to stay in the moment i'm trying to live one moment at a time i cannot allow myself to think ahead , although that is a very difficult thing not to do however , if i allow the negative projection to take hold , i 'll likely end up paralyzed , desperate , and discontent i'm trying not to think this is a time for trust and faith i'm not so great at either of those i have to trust everything will work out as it should , that i 'll be able to handle whatever is ahead thinking about it or predicting the future does not help but trusting things will work out , and trusting i 'll be taken care of is very , very difficult i ca n't think about that either perhaps , as our new president elect stated last night , this is a defining moment for me