so , i had my second hip surgery months ago as a result , i just reached a goal of swimming one mile without stopping took me about weeks to get there started at zero i could swim , but i could n't swim laps one or two lengths of the pool and i was sucking air big time ! ! i hated it ! but my hip was n't strong enough to allow me to run like i wanted , and with the depression weight gain i was motivated to get fit ! so , although i could n't believe it , i swam one mile times within the last days ! meeting a goal feels so good ! having a goal felt good it was nice to have a concrete goal with a concrete training plan again i had tried a concrete training plan last summer with the goal of running a qualifying time at the twin cities marathon soon , the combination of an extra pounds and my apparently still too weak hip derailed that goal i was slow running was hard , really hard it was so hard , i was sure there was something seriously wrong , like a heart or lung problem i just could n't go i changed the goal to just finishing the tcm , but by late july i was injured and done i did n't figure it out at the time , but now i realize my hip weakness caused achilles and patellar tendonitis being a runner , i tried at first to run through the pain being a pt , i then tried to treat the pain being a person with depression , i continually tried not to succumb to anxiety , disappointment , and hopelessness goals are tricky things when you have depression the evil depression constantly bombards my brain with condemnation you are worthless ! you are stupid ! you are slow ! you will never be the person you used to be ! this is it this is how you are going to be the rest of your life ! what a hopeless waste , you are ! insert evil laughter here the audacity it takes to strive for a goal you may fail to achieve is enormous ! yep , goals are tricky with depression with my illness constantly corrupting my thoughts , setting goals is often terrifying if i fail to meet or exceed those goals all of the nastiness screaming in my head is instantaneously reinforced and once those thoughts are proven to be real , they stop being thoughts and become me my depression loves when that happens it gets what it was craving , and it is satiated by my desperation depression wins so swimming mile when i previously could n't swim lap that was a big deal this time , etta wins