and thank god , it 's over ! three hours , minutes , and seconds after the gun went off this morning , i finished the austin marathon it was perhaps the most challenging and difficult marathon i have ever completed ! first of all , it was warm it was over degrees at the start i do n't know how high the temperature climbed during the race , but i'm going to guess it was easily in the seventies secondly , the wind was brutal again , i'm only guessing , but it had to be consistently blowing at least miles per hour , and for half of the race it blew directly in our faces and finally , the course was the most challenging i have ever experienced it was hilly ! hill after hill after hill the elevation map below does not do it justice oh , and lastly , i spent more than three minutes in the portable toilets ! it was less than a perfect day despite the less than perfect conditions and the challenging terrain , i'm quite encouraged by my results despite the hills and headwind , i ran sub pace for much of the race my pipe dream was a , and based on today 's result on such a difficult day , i know it may no longer be a pipe dream put me on a flat , fast course , and i think i may be able to do it overall , i managed per mile , including the two pit stops my actual running pace was per mile i finished th out of , women even more remarkable , i finished th ! ! out of women in my age division ! that , i have to say , is pretty cool ! i certainly was n't expecting that ! i'm really happy i persevered through a difficult day my first pit stop came at miles i got a terrible side ache around mile , and i began walking up some very steep hills around mile at mile , still struggling with the side ache , i contemplated quitting i knew my mother was waiting around mile , so i kept going when i saw my mother , i told her i 'd be happy to reach mile my legs were so trashed i got to mile , and out of sheer stubborn ness , i kept putting one foot in front of the other i figured i 'd get the hell off that course faster if i could keep running i did n't want to be out there one extra minute ! those last five miles were , well , tough but i did it i walked when i needed to , but mostly i ran i do n't think i 've ever been more thrilled to see a finish line ! today 's race reminds me , and so i 'll remind you , that we can often do more than we think possible whether it 's surviving mental illness , completing a lengthy project , getting sober , or finishing a marathon there are so many things we can accomplish if we just keep putting one foot in front of the other what can you accomplish today ? think about it and thank you for your support during my latest journey to the finish line