sometimes i just have to smile i have had one of the longest weekends of my life ! while i made it out to one meeting and lunch yesterday , i spent the rest of the weekend in bed every time i got out of bed thinking i was done with that sleeping thing , i got sucked right back in neither my mood nor my body could lift long enough to do much more than change the radio station today was even worse i wanted to get some exercise i got up i laid back down and fell asleep i got up i laid back down and fell asleep i got up you get the idea it was almost pm when i could n't stand it anymore i just had to get out of bed ! i had to exercise ! finally , i threw off the covers and asked puck if he wanted to go for a run that clinched it i had n't even gathered the energy to stand yet , but once puck gets the question , there is no turning back with his overbearing expectation encouraging my every move , we made it out the door within minutes as you can imagine , days in bed while consuming nothing but pizza and ice cream do not lend themselves to a productive , feel good run ! as my favorite teenager so eloquently puts it , dah ! ! ! so , the run was actually a run walk at a frustratingly leisurely pace but , hey , i was pretty impressed with myself i was vertical ! and , it turns out , when you take walk breaks in the spring in minnesota , you find money ! i found two quarters early in my first walk break nice i thought , is this god 's way of saying , way to go ? three miles later i approached my block and began walking much earlier than i would have normally as i crossed the intersection near my house there was another quarter right off the curb ! thanks ! one more step i found a dime and a penny i started thinking , i gotta have a slow , crappy run more often ! as i reached the middle of the intersection it suddenly appeared that someone had lost their entire piggy bank ! there were hundreds of coins scattered everywhere ! they were nearly all pennies and in typical minnesota fashion they were nearly ground into the asphalt from repeated snowplow assaults i briefly contemplated leaving the coins there , as they were only pennies but they were everywhere , and i would n't want some little kid wandering out there to get them , i rationalized so , after about minutes of using one free hand puck was in the other to pluck the coins , and quick reflexes to dodge the traffic , i walked away with a mitten full of money my total payoff for getting out of bed and forcing a semi crappy run was pennies , quarters , dimes , and nickel not bad funny how things work out sometimes i just have to smile