you may have noticed i was a bit vague in my last post i noted that i ran my long run despite feeling lower and heavier than i had felt in years i purposefully did n't mention my run was miles fifteen miles ? ! ? how can you run miles when you say you feel tired , sad , and hopeless ? that does n't make any sense ! there 's no way a person could do that while feeling as bad as you say you were feeling ! so you 're either lying , attention seeking , or both ! or if you can run miles while feeling so bad , then i can expect my son , daughter , or best friend to do more when they 're feeling bad ! and therein lies the dilemma my dilemma is sometimes i can do things despite feeling really bad , but that does n't mean i do n't feel bad however , i understand how difficult that may be for a normie to comprehend heck , it 's even hard for me to comprehend at times ! it just does n't make sense fortunately , i 've forced myself out the door often enough to know sometimes my body can do things despite evidence to the contrary that 's why i forced myself out the door on saturday i had to trust i 'd be able to run despite feeling bad i did run it was n't pretty at first , but i ran miles and met my goal i hesitated defining my long run , however , out of fear fear my symptoms might have been taken less seriously i hesitated writing about running miles out of fear your symptoms might be taken less seriously this is the strange , contradictory nature of my depression sometimes my mood is okay , but i ca n't get out of bed sometimes my mood is black and hopeless , yet i can run miles ? ? yes and it does n't mean i did n't feel bad honesty should n't be a dilemma i guess i'm still too concerned with what others think i realize there are multitudes of providers , families , and friends who would find nonsense in what i reported feeling versus what i accomplished on saturday it 's a dilemma , but the goal of this blog is to educate others and to support people with mental illness i do n't accomplish either of those goals by leaving out parts of my reality after all maybe it 's your reality , too to educate and support , i must be honest maybe some of you share my experience ? maybe you can sometimes do things contrary to your mood state maybe it baffles you , too maybe there are parents , siblings , friends , and perhaps healthcare providers who witness these contradictory acts maybe it causes them to question your reality , your story , your experience i do n't want to perpetuate that my experience supports the contradiction sometimes we can do things despite feeling like crap it does n't mean we do n't feel like crap right ?