i 've been quiet for a few days i do n't mind being quiet , but now that i 've got this blog , quiet stresses me out if i do n't write , people do n't visit if people do n't visit , i do n't get comments if i do n't get comments , i miss out on cool interactions ! i try to write every day , and i feel a certain obligation to keep that up , but my brain has gone blank and my energy bust frustrating i guess this has been one of those weeks , and especially weekend , where i 've had to be quite stingy with and protective of my energy i may have set a new record for napping over the last days ! it seems everything i planned to do required a preemptive nap and i mean everything i did ! i think i napped or times yesterday ! i'm used to taking naps before running , but not every run ! and this morning , within minutes of getting out of bed , i required a minute nap just to motivate out to a meeting , which was only blocks from my home ! that was a bit pathetic but , i know if i had n't laid down and closed my eyes , i would have missed that meeting and i felt it was critical to get to that meeting , for if i had not gotten out of my house early , i may not have made it out at all that has been my experience instead of feeling more refreshed because i 'd allowed myself more rest , i 'd have felt more sloth like if i had skipped the meeting ! missing a scheduled appointment compounds rather than relieves the energy shortfall this is the joy of this illness ! i am constantly forced to figure these complexities out ! logic is useless in fact , attempting to describe this almost feels useless on the one hand , i'm telling you i required a record number of naps just to function yet , if you looked at what i accomplished this weekend , you 'd shake your head in confusion i'm not feeling fatigued necessarily , but i do n't have any energy if i am able to nap , i get a lot done except my dishes and laundry , which are always on the bottom of the list ! over the past few days , i ran my miles and swam my laps , but i did n't have the energy to sit and write i do n't really get it do you ? i 've been through this with my artwork , too i do my best painting when i feel like crap , but if i feel too crappy i do n't have enough energy to paint weird the bottom line today i'm sober i'm very grateful i am fortunate to have had the time and space to nap which allowed me enough energy to run , swim , get to some meetings , and socialize this weekend my brain ? hopefully it will resume active residence in the very near future now , where did i leave my pillow ?