if you 've been paying attention , you may recall me mentioning , a few dozen times , that i 've gained some weight over the past year and a half this has been particularly distressing because a i 've always been one of those annoying people who could eat whatever i wanted without worrying about weight gain , b i'm a runner , and extra pounds equal extra pounding on my joints and extra minutes on my finishing times , and c i cannot not eat chocolate , ice cream , or cookie dough ! yup , cookie dough although i 've blamed this weight gain on everything i can think of related to my depression , medication , age , etc , there is one probable contributing culprit i have repeatedly and subconsciously of course ! denied the cookie dough factor ! let me explain i love chocolate chip cookies toll house happen to be the best , just like grandma used to make but baking is such a bother first , i 've got to open the oven then i must empty the oven , because of course all of my large pots , pans , cookie sheets , and baking dishes are stored in there , oh , and sometimes bread , too since all the junk is in the oven , i 'll need to rearrange the oven racks before preheating finally , after spooning the dough onto the cookie sheets , i 'll be forced to watch in agony as my mercurial oven blackens the cookie bottoms before so much as browning the tops i 'll be stressed and exhausted after only burned cookies ! like i said , baking is such a bother ! but , no worries , right ? because i like chocolate chip cookie dough just as much as chocolate chip cookies , and toll house is still the best ! so , i wo n't bother with the bothersome baking ! unfortunately , mixing is twice the bother of baking ! there are all of those ingredients i only use twice a year hiding in the dark , inner recesses of my kitchen cabinets what is the shelf life of baking powder anyway ? i purchased mine in still good , you think ? fortunately , i no longer need to answer that question my baking powder may continue aging , for toll house rescued me from the mixing woes now i can just buy my cookie dough and therein lies the problem toll house sells its perfect cookie dough in perfectly chilled , plastic encased cylinders at my local grocery stores when i have a craving , i no longer have to play marco polo with decrepit , musty raw materials throughout my kitchen i no longer have to go spelunking for the big bowl and the mixer i no longer need to relocate my pots , pans , cookie sheets , and baking dishes to my bathtub ! no ! today , when i get a hankering for some perfect chocolate chip cookie dough because i told you baking was a bother , i can have it in my hands within minutes ! does n't matter if i turn east or west in minutes , i 'll be peeling back that plastic like a banana peel like a banana peel ahhhh cookie dough and that , my friends , is the cookie dough factor