well , they 've done it again ! we thought this might be the year when common sense would gain a foot hold and our government would finally recognize that mental illnesses are , well , illnesses ! but our fat cats in the us senate , securely protected by a generous healthcare plan which i believe they themselves create , foiled any possibility of common sense and declined to even bring the following medicare bill up for a vote after you read the following press release from nami com , pleases help me understand this how in the world can they fail to bring this legislation up for a vote when the house of representatives overwhelmingly and bipartisan ly approved the very same bill ? ! ! senate falls short on medicare package june , on june , the senate fell just one vote short of moving forward to pass a package of reforms to the medicare program , the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of hr the vote was , votes short of the needed close off debate click here to see how your senators voted the house had cleared hr by an overwhelming bipartisan vote of on june thanks to your advocacy contacting house members hr includes a number of critical provisions for medicare beneficiaries living with serious mental illness , including parity for cost sharing for outpatient mental health services under part b , gradually moving the current discriminatory requirement down to between and , statutory authority under the part d drug benefit for the centers for medicare and medicaid services cms to ensure broad coverage on prescription drug plan formularies for antipsychotics , antidepressants and anticonvulsants , removal of the current ban on part d plans offering coverage for benzodiazepines a critical tool in treatment for acute mania in bipolar disorder and severe anxiety disorders , changes to eligibility for the part d low income subsidy lis program also known as extra help these reforms include an increase the amount of allowable resources , elimination of barriers to enrollment and the current late enrollment penalty and new exemptions for the value of a life insurance policy and in kind support and maintenance eligibility for the lis significantly lowers premiums and cost sharing for drug coverage and exempts beneficiaries from the doughnut hole coverage gap congress must revisit this medicare legislation in july as of july , payments to physicians under medicare part b will be cut by an average of as the physician payment update known as sgr expires how can these senators ethically fail to support a bill which aims to cover all illnesses equally ? apparently , our senators feel they have the right to decide which u s citizens are worthy of care and which should fend for themselves a draconian survival of the fittest where your wealth and diagnosis determine if you live or die ! pathetic ! i am absolutely disgusted ! what 's next for this self appointed moral majority ? quadriplegics require hundreds of thousands of dollars of lifelong care ! what about smokers ? i mean , they bring their shit on themselves ! why should my tax dollars support their oxygen tanks ? crass ? ridiculous ? you bet ! but look out america tomorrow your diagnosis may be politically incorrect what will you do when this group of short sighted , self serving , non medical hacks deletes you from their hallmark list ? think it ca n't happen ? it just happened , again , to millions of your friends , family and neighbors people who wo n't even reveal to you their struggles because our own government righteously legislates prejudice and stigma against them like my colleague , your initial awareness may occur when your loved one ends up on the street or dead think it ca n't happen to you ? think again ! and pay off that mortgage before you buy your next pack of smokes