dressage druh sahzh fr dre sazh a series of intricate steps , gaits , etc , taught to an exhibition horse the art or method of training a horse in obedience and in precision of movement boxing bok sing the act , technique , or profession of fighting with the fists , with or without boxing gloves source dictionary com the olympics are good news for insomniacs for the next days , you 'd be hard pressed to spend one middle of the night waking moment without the availability of televised sports unfortunately , as i learned at a m , the sports available include two men pummeling each other in a small , square , ring ? and woolen clad riders atop prancing horses in a large , rectangular , ring ? okay , are n't rings circular ? is n't that the definition of ring ? sorry , lack of sleep leaves me a bit distractable where was i ? oh , yah horses , wool jackets , degrees , top hats dressage at in the morning , dressage took center stage now , i love horses , despite being deathly allergic to them literally , turn blue , stop breathing , allergic but i digress again i had to look up the exact definition of this sport , because for the life of me , i could not figure out what the hell i was looking at ! at least with boxing , i know the goal last guy standing wins ! but dressage ? ? not so easy to determine the goal in my sleep deprived , pre dawn stupor , this is what i saw there was a beautiful horse , a sweaty rider totally inappropriate attire for degrees , and a bunch of stiff judges sitting in a booth horse and rider stoically walked , trotted , and pranced forward , sideways , diagonally and in circles it appeared very serious and stressful , but god only knows why ! not much to ooooh and aaaah about unless you knew what was going on with the exception of one horse who tried to flee the ring , rider in tow , that was momentarily exciting all the competitors looked pretty much the same to me perhaps the lower scoring horses neglected to point their hooves ? i kept waiting for the announcers to enlighten me , but they were n't much help either actually , they were so unenlightening , i should have been droned right back to sleep ! i mean , c'mon ! even in beach volleyball , an infinitely more familiar sport , the commentators repeatedly explained the rules , scoring and strategy of the game i guess if the insomnia continues , i 'll have to stick to two guys pummeling each other in a small , square ring it ai n't nearly as pretty , but at least it makes sense