loony tunes , and he did n't mean the cartoon those words were uttered by someone i know meant no harm during an aa meeting this morning so why have those words bugged me for the rest of the day ? i 'll tell you why think of any other biological , treatable , medical illness that carries more stigma than mental illness today , we are much more likely to know when a friend or co worker is hospitalized for alcoholism or drug abuse than if they were hospitalized for mental illness even among alcoholics , mental illness is seen as less than for some reason , alcoholics can fully embrace defining alcoholism as an illness but depression , bi polar disorder , or schizophrenia those are character defects i could point out that if i never lifted a drink to my lips , i never would have become an alcoholic with or without drinking , i would still have mental illness my mental illness developed without any action on my part it developed because it is a biological , treatable , brain disease ! ! in fact , you would think my healthy lifestyle prior to the onset of my illness should have protected me ! i should n't have gotten depression ! but that 's like saying someone should n't get cancer they are both non discriminatory illnesses at least with alcoholism , i can point to an external cause drinking ! no drink no alcoholism ! but depression ? no cause other than screwed up brain chemistry why is it okay to use derogatory terms to speak about people with mental illness ? why , even among alcoholics , do those of us with mental illness feel the need to whisper when speaking of it ? why , whenever i mention my mental illness in a meeting , do several other alcoholics confide in me about their own closeted mental illness struggles ? we can yell loud and proud about our drinking problems but our mental illness still crushes us with shame and for good reason if we dare be open about it , we may be reprimanded , as i was after one meeting i was scolded for discussing my struggle with fatigue and the resultant difficulty connecting with others , which ultimately put me at higher risk for relapse can you imagine that woman scolding me if my fatigue had been caused by a brain tumor rather than by my brain chemistry ? ? ? never ! never in a million years ! crazy nuts psycho stupid lazy weird weirdo loony loony tunes bonkers warped not playing with a full deck fried gay retarded idiot schizo schizoid mental sick sicko wacked wack job psychotic loco maniac mad insane fruit fruitcake bent off off his rocker braindead loopy looped slow think about it how many derogatory labels are used daily to describe people with cancer ? or diabetes ? or heart disease ? can you come up with two ? one ? think about it