just as i turned out my lights and headed to bed , my doorbell rang what the hell ? who rings a doorbell so late at night ? i apprehensively approached my front door peering through the glass , i recognized my neighbor standing there i opened the door as the words rushed out of her mouth , someone just broke into our house ! ironic just an hour earlier i told a woman , who was thinking of moving into town , how safe our neighborhood had been i questioned my neighbor , what happened ? they had been out for dinner , away from home for a mere three hours , when someone smashed their way in she wanted to know if i had heard anything i was shocked i had n't our homes are only one driveway width apart the scumbags took everything they could , ransacking the house in the process my neighbor cried as she detailed the losses oh , and in case you were wondering , the police were of no help when my neighbor called last night , the officer told him to file a report online ! they did n't even send a car ! i'm a supporter of my local police , but this shocked me ! i guess we do n't pay enough taxes in this part of town my first feeling was fear my first thought was , why not me ? why did they choose their home rather than mine ? it was really scary and ironic because i had thought about the possibility of a break in on the heels of my garage sale the thought had crossed my mind what better time to target a home than right after they take in a whole bunch of cash over a weekend ? ! if they had hit my home , they certainly would have taken quite a bounty , as i had yet to make it to the bank i even wondered if i was supposed to be the target , but the scumbags screwed up and hit the wrong house ! of course i did n't mention those fears to my neighbor i was immediately relieved to have a dog , as i went to bed scared maybe the dog tie outs hanging at the front and back doors were actually what saved me , because i was gone for about an hour last night , too i'm not sure what puck would do if someone smashed their way inside , but i do know he has a good bark as long as they are outside he tends to wag his tail once someone actually approaches him hopefully , no one will ever test him my sense of security is definitely shaken i 'll be locking and double locking the doors for a long time to come i may even finally replace my back door the current door would be easy to break ultimately , i have no control over whether someone breaks in or not , and that 's frustrating i do n't like feeling scared in my own home i 'll let you know if anything positive comes out of the situation