i finally put my training to the test today i ran a k race i did n't want to do it see fear here , because when i ran this race last year it was shockingly difficult , and i was shockingly slow and like today , last year this race was the first of my season unfortunately , last year 's distressing effort and disappointing result foretold the effort and result of each successive race last season today , i feared another excruciating effort and slow , slow time what would that mean ? what would i do ? god , i would be so disappointed ! last year i had n't trained nearly this much or this hard , so i could rationalize the poor result but if that happens today ? after all this consistent training ? what would i do ? what would that mean ? blah , blah , fear , fear , fear , blah , blah , blah , fear , fear you get the idea it 's impossible to explain , but last year i was basically out of breath from the gun that would n't have been a big deal except my watch told me my pace was a good minute slower per mile than i was used to running i was running behind runners i had never run behind , and eventually i finished behind them , too ! it was truly alarming it only got more alarming with each successive race , as the result proved to be no fluke something was wrong ! i was sure of it unfortunately , nothing was wrong lol ! only a runner could write such a ridiculous statement ! despite numerous medical tests , i was incredibly normal i was also incredibly slow for me today , i raced despite my fear of being slow , feeling bad , or facing disappointment it was cold , rainy and windy not exactly perfect running conditions on the mile out and back course , i decided to go out conservatively and then kick it up after the turnaround if i was able i was not winded from the gun my legs felt strong i immediately knew i was in much better condition than last year i was pleasantly surprised to see my splits in the high minute to low minute range i felt more confident this was going to be waaay better than last year , i thought i was even able to speed up after the turnaround , as i had hoped , dropping a few women who were hanging a bit too close nobody passed me the entire second half of the race prior to last year , that was something i always strove for and usually achieved it was very cool to get that personal benchmark back the last couple miles sucked , but the last couple miles always suck , especially with a cold headwind ! my pace was slower than i would have liked , but it felt like a good start to the season in other words , i expect only improvement besides , i ran waaay better than last year ! of that i was sure ! it was a tough run , but i felt very good , and satisfied , and proud i had no idea what my time was last year so , in preparation for this post , i looked up my time look carefully , and see what a difference a year makes yup , that 's right , i actually ran slower this year than last ! i was surprised , too what 's that saying about attitude making all the difference ?