it 's boston marathon day today many folks i know ran , including my friend , renee , who had an awesome race it 's been bittersweet reading all of her blog posts not only do i miss living in boston , where i lived for more than five years , i should have been running today along with all those folks i know i qualified the day after registration closed ! i'm trying to remember to be grateful for qualifying at all trust me , i will sign up the first day registration re opens and use my qualification to run it next year ! unfortunately , i was unable to watch the marathon , as nobody broadcast it live damn espn ! they played repeat after repeat of sportscenter when they could have been broadcasting one of the greatest marathons in the world ! oh well , i had a very busy day while awaiting the results of my friends i started the day with a medium hard bike ride followed by a hard run i ran seven , second steep hills in the middle of my minute run phew ! hills after a bike ride my quads were screaming at me ! it was a good workout after fixing my computer do n't you hate computer malfunctions i put my new battery in my motorcycle did n't know i had a motorcycle ? i do it 's a beautiful honda shadow i 'll post a picture of it soon it 's back in the garage now i did n't take it out at all last summer , too busy training for marathons , so i was n't sure if it would start but after getting some gas in the carbs , it started right up i rode my motorcycle on all of my errands the dentist , the office , a visit to my new sponsee , and then went for a ride in the country it was a gorgeous day , and there is nothing quite like speeding along in the open air i ca n't wait to ride it again tomorrow ! tonight i'm destined to watch more training videos for work i 'll probably fall asleep doing that i ca n't believe how many there are to watch ! tomorrow i get my first chance at patient care with my new employer i'm not worried about the patient care piece , but the computer documentation is overwhelming it will be nice to have another pt there to guide me through it i'm really hoping i can learn it all quickly well , i better get going on those videos have a lovely evening !