there are n't too many things in this world which i truly hate after all , if i dislike something , i generally avoid it or remove it from my life but to every rule , there seems to be an exception in this case , it is an unavoidable , despicable exception it is grocery shopping i hate grocery shopping ! i hate it ! i hate everything about grocery shopping , from the time it wastes to the money i'm forced to spend to the artificial environment which sucks me in i hate grocery shopping i hate the bright white fluorescent lighting i hate the miles of aisles with their millions of intermingled colors , shapes , and sizes ! after a couple of minutes everything looks the same ! every aisle seems eerily similar to the one before have i been down this aisle already or not ? did i come from the left or the right ? where 's the front of the store ? where am i ? ? ? i hate driving that damn rickety cart around the corners while looking up to survey the aisle 's overhead sign no matter how many times i 've been there , i still look like a tourist on the subway in new york ! i hate grocery shopping ! and simply reading the sign does n't solve the puzzle i still need to figure out the classification system used by each particular store ! i hate trying to decipher that ! are there rules ? perhaps a referee would be helpful are raisins snacks , fruits , or baking supplies ? i think they are snacks at the cub and baking supplies at hyvee , or is it the other way around ? and what about target ? where do they stock the raisins ? one store puts popcorn the old fashioned kernels in the fresh fruit area , another in back with the chips , and another does n't carry it at all ! sometimes , i specifically need popcorn ! ugh ! like charlie brown with the football , invariably i end up at the store without popcorn in stock ! walmart , i think or is it target ? maybe it 's walmart which does n't have the raisins i like oh , and do n't get me started on brand names ! god forbid i find a particular brand i like ! once , i spent about months trying to determine where it was i bought those razors i liked so much ! to this day , i still do not know i hate grocery shopping ! money is the other issue i hate grocery shopping because it costs so much money ! even if my intention is moderation , those food stuffed , overly bright , artificial warehouses mesmerize and hypnotize me once i step through their doors i 'll go in for milk and bread , and i 'll vow to only spend a few dollars and minutes that 's it , minutes maximum , inside the store but it 's no use ninety minutes later i 'll walk out a glassy eyed pauper , two shopping carts in tow , wondering what day it is if you 'll dare to approach my disheveled frame , you 'll likely hear me mumbling , only minutes minutes only minutes in the store as i wander aimlessly searching for my car i hate grocery shopping i hate grocery shopping because grocery stores are conspirators ! grocery shopping is a conspiracy ! it 's not enough that we have to eat we have no choice but to spend our hard earned money on their food , but that 's not enough somehow , these stores get us to spend our money on so much more more food , more trinkets , more books , more magazines , more coffee , more , more , more until we leave penniless and powerless but like good , active alcoholics , we 'll be back we ca n't stay away we 'll be back for more i hate grocery shopping !