watching the olympic women 's marathon in the wee hours of sunday morning , i saw a public service announcement i e a commercial about mental illness ! i was stunned and thrilled i immediately got out my computer and discovered the sponsoring website the bring change mind movement is sponsoring psa 's , billboards , and their website to educate people about mental illness and specifically , it appears , about stigma with mouth agape i excitedly paged through the site , and i encourage you to do the same while reading through the site , i was given the option of sharing it on facebook , which i did this is where it got interesting i do n't know exactly how many facebook friends i have , but it is several hundred for sure i do know that many of my friends are involved in causes for which they care , like breast cancer , march of dimes , or multiple sclerosis , because they frequently post links to these causes on facebook if it is a cause i also care about , or sometimes simply to show my support , i might like their post or make a comment i'm usually one of people to do so that 's the facebook way of showing support , is n't it ? most of my friends know about my battle with mental illness , specifically depression some of them even read this blog , so i was interested to see the response to my facebook link throughout the day , i checked into facebook to see how my link was received it 's been days now my several hundred friends have come through with comment and likes what is that about ? one comment and three likes from several hundred people ? i 'll tell you what it 's about it 's about stigma ! i am so fed up with stigma ! even in the rather safe arena of facebook , where all you have to do is click a button to show support , hardly a soul showed up is it that scary to to support someone with mental illness ? does liking a link about mental illness mean you might be crazy , too ? what , i wonder , were people afraid would happen if they clicked that like button ? i thought things were improving , but i'm afraid stigma still reigns supreme i'm tired of it ! i 've probably pissed a few people off by writing this , but i do n't care i'm tired of being disappointed by the pervasiveness of stigma i'm angry i have an illness made more difficult by stigma it appears there are very few people , even among my relatives , friends and acquaintances , who see mental illness as something for which they should be concerned perhaps , despite this being , and despite lots of available education , they do n't see my illness as an illness at all i guess i do n't know fighting stigma is a constant battle it should be an unnecessary battle , but i guess i 've just been rudely reminded there is much more battling ahead