oh my gosh ! where do i start ? yesterday was a really , really good day ! it 's been a little while maybe even a long while since i 've had a day like yesterday it was a productive day filled with surprises ! what could be better than that ? i started my day with a long list of things to do i was a bit overwhelmed , as is usual when i have a long list for a brief moment , i contemplated going back to bed and doing it all later thankfully , i did n't and i think that decision brought some good karma my way after my morning coffee , i returned some phone calls and organized my activities first , i swam i was supposed to run , but my legs just are n't cooperating lately my left calf and shin pain are back , and now i have pretty significant right knee pain remember when i twisted that knee playing golf a few months ago ? well , i'm pretty sure i have a torn meniscus , and i think it is now objecting to running it also objects to full knee flexion , i e i ca n't kneel , and full knee extension , i e i ca n't straighten my knee i'm planning an md appointment , but that was n't on my list yesterday so i swam miles mile in flippers in minutes boring and very tiring i think i'm losing some of my fitness but i did it ! after eating some wonderful pasta at my gym , i set out to conquer the rest of my schedule a long line at the post office was the first stop then i was off to mills fleet farm to replace my back door 's broken door knob i locked myself out of the house sunday and had to literally break in after filling my gas tank at the mills gas station , i was off to dick 's sporting goods i picked up a present for a friend , one who may read this blog , so i ca n't tell you what it was let 's just say she 's an avid golfer the target next door then swallowed me up for about an hour even with a list it is so hard to get out of that store once i'm inside ! too many goodies to peruse ! i bought three more presents for the friends with whom i will be spending christmas before returning home now for the good part ! when i got home there were four messages on my voice mail ! four ! nobody ever calls me , so that was quite exciting in and of itself what can i say ? i lead a sheltered life the first message was from my credit union apparently i had won a contest a contest which i did n't even know i had entered ! not only had i won , i won the grand prize ! check out my brand new , gb ipod touch ! whoohoooo ! okay , so that was very exciting , but wait there 's more ! i got three phone calls from a potential new employer ! i enjoy my job , but driving minutes on a very dangerous road has taken it 's toll i 'd been hoping for something closer to home for the past year our occupational therapist was recently hired away from us by a new company in my city i decided to give them my name , so i filled out an online application at pm monday night they made their first call to me at am yesterday morning ! two more calls followed , including one offering an interview ! whoohoooo ! i 'll let you know more details as they emerge , but i am very excited ! well , i'm actually very , very , very excited but i'm trying to contain myself i ended my day with a great aa meeting a friend , and newcomer , i brought to this meeting last week showed up again last night she had already transformed from a tearful , shaky shell to a smiling , fresh faced woman it 's always great to see people come back after their introduction to the program i'm keeping her in my prayers if she gets it , like i got it , her life will certainly change ! it 's not always sunshine and roses , but sometimes it is ! if i was n't sober , i 'd never have had the day i had yesterday , and for that i'm very grateful have a great day , everyone !