i saw you today , and marissa you were looking fine ! stretching out those quads along the path prior to your run , it was nice of you to wave and say hi i saw you today , pj or graybeard or whatever it is you are calling yourself today i 've seen you out a lot over the past few weeks ! i figured you were a visitor i heard the twang in your voice when you asked , which one is the mayo building ? hope you 're enjoying our smog free , humidity free bike paths keep walking like that , and you 'll need to trade those 's for a pair of 's ! i saw you today , beartwinsmom , playing with those boys must have been a school function , huh ? there were a lot of kids out in that park ! looked like you were enjoying the moment , though ! i envy you did n't i see you at a soccer game the other night , too ? i saw you today , shiv i'm always a little leery of a bunch of young dudes hanging together , but then you waved hello thanks what were you doing ? just soaking up some sun ? it was a beautiful day to be outside hope you enjoyed it ! i saw you today , bpd good for you for getting out and moving around i know that is n't always easy , so i really felt glad to see you across the road keep it up ! i saw you today , untreatable you probably missed me , as you were coming out of the busy government center at the time i hope you did n't have to spend too much time inside today maybe you were just getting your license renewed ? we 'll have to have lunch when you 've got the time i saw you today and you , and you , and you i realized on my run today that i do see you guys all over the place since i only know you through cyberspace , i can create your live avatar in whatever physical form embodies your attributes the attributes i associate with you something about the way that woman looked and waved hello today made me think of marissa ! heck , it could have been marissa ! so , to me , poof i just ran past marissa once i realized what i had been unconsciously doing for days ! it actually got quite fun ! from now on i 'll be looking for all of you when i am out ! neat