i ran the med city half marathon in rochester , mn , this morning this is how it went i woke up at am , as usual before a race starting at am , in order to eat and have my coffee i set out for my warm up miles at am i do n't usually run warm up miles , but today was my last scheduled long run prior to grandma 's marathon in weeks , so i needed to run miles today i ran miles prior to boarding the bus for the start of the race one hour later , the race began i lined up with the pace group within the first miles , the pace proved to be too fast i let the group go i knew there was a pace group somewhere behind me that was important because i needed to run under in order to qualify for the new york city marathon i decided not to look at my watch , focus on keeping my pace , and hang on for as long as i could while hopefully keeping that pace group from passing me for the rest of the race and that 's exactly what happened i focused on my form , did n't look at my watch , battled my negative thoughts , ran as hard as i could , and i qualified ! to say it was difficult would be an understatement it was hard ! really hard ! i had to battle my negative thinking for at least the first hilly miles i was chastising myself for running too fast , running too many miles before the race , expecting too much from myself you name the negative thought , i had it ! by mile , i no longer had the luxury of so many thoughts i had to focus on one mile at a time by mile , i was down to focusing on one step at a time my legs were so tired , but i just kept pushing forward and tried not to walk with the exception of a couple of water stops , which i walked through , i ran the entire way and met my goal i qualified for new york mercifully , i made it to the finish line with one minute to spare my official time was i placed st out of runners male and female , and i was third shocked ! out of women in my age group i think i'm even going to get a cool little award for that ! i'm pleased i'm grateful for the ability with which god has gifted me i'm pleased i was able to run under an minute per mile pace , especially after running warm up miles and i'm really glad i 've qualified for new york ! it was a good day add i just looked up the nyc qualifying times , and i actually only qualified with seconds to spare apparently they 've changed the qualifying time from to ! whew ! glad i did n't walk through any other water stops !