writing here has been difficult lately , as i have been struggling with fatigue , or more definitively , somnolence my doc and i have slowly figured out that one of the major causes of my slower than normal running pace is a significantly increased heart rate recently , we realized the culprit behind the increased heart rate was one of my most beneficial medications it is a med i take primarily for fatigue fatigue became a crippling symptom of my depression about years ago this med , once i started it , changed my life i was able to function again one significant piece of my functioning life is running and racing i am a runner it is part of my identity i have been incredibly frustrated over the past couple years with my running , as no matter how well trained i 've been , i have not been able to come near my past running performances not only that , but running paces that would have been too slow just a couple years ago have been painful , breathless , slogs since fortunately and unfortunately , we now realize this fatigue medication is the culprit it 's main side effect for me and another female runner my doc treats is an increased heart rate for a runner , increasing the resting heart rate is tortuous ! it 's akin to being totally out of shape despite thousands of hours and hundreds of miles of training ! i 've been breathless and unable to move my body any faster at what used to be a mundane pace it 's been very frustrating fortunately , figuring out that it is the medication causing the problem means the problem is easily fixable decrease the medication ! and that 's what we 've been doing over the past weeks decreasing the med did n't seem to cause an increase in fatigue initially unfortunately , it also did not decrease my heart rate nor facilitate improved running tolerance we decreased the medication again about days ago low and behold , i just completed a breakthrough running week ! i saw almost miraculous improvements in my running pace and tolerance ! unfortunately , i 've also begun to re experience some days , like yesterday , where i 've not been able to wake up nor stay awake days , like yesterday , where i 've run and run well , but otherwise slept almost as many hours as i was awake the med decrease improved my running life , as i wished but what about the rest of my life ? what do i do ? do i increase the med , which will increase my heart rate and slow my running again leaving me frustrated and non competitive ? do i stay on the decreased med , run fast , which improves my self esteem and confidence , but otherwise struggle to function due to debilitating fatigue ? i do n't know i do n't know i'm worried i do n't want to have to make this decision , and maybe i wo n't have to after all there are other possibilities for the present fatigue i do n't have to figure it all out today , right ? i pray i do n't have to figure it out at all the dilemma feels impossible do i take more of the med and improve my life , or do i take less of the med and improve my life ? i pray i do n't have to decide what would you do ?