stop the world ! i want to get off ! everything feels like it is happening too fast ! or it is supposed to be happening too soon ! i do n't feel like i have time to prepare for anything ! yet , that may not be reality ! but it does n't matter if it is reality or not , does it ? because it still is ! stop the world ! i want to get off ! i need a break ! and yet , did n't i just have a break ? yes so why was n't that enough ? how much of a break do i need ? and does it make any sense that one of my main stressors today is that i 've been offered another break ? a week in colorado , in the mountains , at a family cabin , with people i love and i'm complaining ? how pathetic is that ? how can this opportunity cause more stress ? what am i afraid of ? why do i feel so overwhelmed , rushed , and inadequate ? why must another opportunity cause so much stress that i'm actually thinking i may not go ! every chance i get raises more questions i ca n't adequately answer , prioritize , or ignore ! so much to do so much to do it feels like too much to do too many decisions to make and i ca n't seem to slow it down my brain ca n't keep track of it all , and i do n't know which end is up ! what do i do first ? is this more important than that ? what about the other thing ? when will that fit in ? if i do this , and that , and that will i have time to do the other ? or will i just end up with more on my list ? that 's what seems to happen one thing sprouts into many more things instead of being finished , i 've only opened another can of worms and my list grows and my brain ca n't keep up and i ca n't figure out what 's important and what 's not ? and i'm afraid of this , and i'm afraid of that and i'm afraid to say no because i feel i should be able to handle it and i'm afraid to ask for time away because i feel i'm already not doing as much as normal people anyway and i ca n't seem to get anything done even when the time appears , which has to be one of the most frustrating things of all ! ! what is wrong with me ? stop the world ! i want to get off ! of course , then what would i do ? i'm afraid i do n't know the answer to that either help ! please help