surprise , surprise ! a couple days ago , i decided to run a half marathon , which i did today it 's an annual , popular race in my community , but i hate it it 's almost always steamy hot , and the course is an out and back to nowhere the turn around is on a gravel road , which really hurts my feet after a couple miles , and it is almost always windy , too ! i hate it so i ran it ! the timing was right i just completed my fifth week of marathon training , so a long mid length race made sense besides , it 's always easier to run faster in a race than when running alone around a track ! i was also curious to see where my fitness was at , especially after my disappointing performance at grandma 's half marathon in june so i ran the half marathon today i ran , and i ran it well ! i was unsure what to expect i knew i was n't in shape to run as fast as i wanted , or less , but i was hoping to go under for reference , my best half marathon time is it really sucks getting old and chubby ! but i digress i ran well today my slowest mile , at , was mile , which is always a good thing ! most significantly , i felt comfortable until around mile nine even after getting uncomfortable , i was able to maintain my pace i did slow at the end , however , which i do n't like to do if the race had ended at mile i would have been thrilled ! i happily crossed the finish line at either race clock or my watch regardless of the official time , i exceeded my expectations today it 's always nice to look down at my watch and see my pace is faster than i feel i'm running i ran several miles under , but i felt like i was running around i love that ! furthermore , it was an absolutely gorgeous day ! as usual , there was a head wind after the turnaround , but it was a cool , dry wind unbelievable it was a good day it was a challenging day one of my biggest challenges today was combating my brain 's negative talk racing , for me , is often combative it 's me versus my brain in a no holds barred , knock 'em down , drag 'em out , gloves off brawl as soon as my brain learned i was feeling comfortable at a quicker than average pace , it 's onslaught began it went something like this brain mile what the hell are you doing ? you ca n't sustain this pace ! etta shut up ! brain taunting you ca n't you ca n't you 're going too fast ! etta shut up ! brain you shut up ! etta shut up ! brain mile still too fast you 're going too fast ! you 're not going to feel good much longer ! etta i'm not listening ! brain you better slow down i'm telling you slow down now or it 's going to get ugly ! etta shut up ! i love this race i love this pace brain no you do n't ! you 're just saying that ! etta yelling i love this race i love this pace brain miles , , you are not in shape for this pace ! no way ! not for miles ! etta fingers in ears la la la la la la la la la i ca n't hear you ! brain yes , you can i know you can you 're starting to get worried you know i'm right ugly , ugly , ugly going to get ugly ! you better slow down ! etta repeatedly i love this race i love this pace i love this race i love this pace brain shut up , shut up , shut up ! etta miles , , , , , , i love this race i love this pace i love this race i love this pace brain mockingly i love this race i love this pace brain miles , , oh , you 're hurting now , are n't you ? serves you right ! i told you too fast etta and yet , i'm still on the same pace ! brain mockingly and yet , i'm still on the same pace ! oooooooohhh etta i love this race i love this pace brain wait 'till next time ! i 'll get you you and your stupid mantra ! etta mile i think i'm going to have a heart attack etta mile thank god ! i'm done ! this exchange is common when i race racing requires that i battle my overly negative brain that brain he 's a tough one but unlike with depression , where my brain has the upper hand , when i'm running a race i usually beat him the physical and mental challenge of racing is exhausting but beating my brain ? that 's a beautiful thing it makes the exhausting battle totally worthwhile today was totally worthwhile