the spat begins on one of two themes i am deaf i am losing my mind and bob is frantically worried about both possibilities i have to admit i do n't hear well in my left ear i have trouble hearing at all in a crowded room i am concerned so i do n't understand , bob said the other day while our friend kim was visiting why do n't you go to dr carter and get a referral for a hearing evaluation ? why do you keep putting it off ? kim and i answered as one because dr carter would make us weigh in and we 're both feeling fat and do n't want to get in trouble with her kim sighed my husband thinks i'm deaf , too , she said but i wo n't go in to see dr carter until i 've lost pounds bob shook his head , stunned at our insanity in unison the losing my mind spat has a bit more urgency bob gets concerned when , lost in my thoughts , i walk right by someone i know without seeing him or her i'm so worried , he said sometimes , you just do n't pay attention to the world around you it happened again yesterday on our way into the local supermarket i had found a small cart at a premium in our location and was walking into the market shrouded in a barrage of thoughts will i be able to write the books i'm longing to write ? to get those proposals in to my agent before he loses interest or retires ? will bob find help at the epilepsy center when we have our first visit next week ? will he have to start a new medication ? is it possible to regulate his epilepsy related mood swings so that he can enjoy life more consistently ? will he continue to be unable to drive for the next few months while he adjusts to his medication ? will i manage to drive us everywhere without a major traffic incident or marital unrest over my driving bob 's backseat driving ? it 's no small thing my driving is n't what it used to be i 've had a couple of undeniable near misses lately am i reaching the point in life , already , when i really should n't be driving ? will i ever get to l a to meet my new little nephew henry before he gets out of the adorable baby stage and into the screaming stranger anxiety phase of life ? what 's happening with my friend mary and when can i manage my next visit with her ? is it a mistake to be going to my th college reunion in october especially now that i 've read that northwestern accepted a major cash donation from the notorious koch brothers and so i'm not sure i even like my alma mater anymore ? what 's happening with my sister and her health problems ? why has n't she called back ? what if she 's in real trouble and is just too depressed to ask for help ? can i stand another three months of vitriolic political campaigning and , even more , the smug , omnipresent face of paul ryan , my personal pick for most loathsome politician in a very crowded bipartisan field of loathsomeness ? is democracy dead ? are we sliding irrevocably into an era of darkness ? kathy ! bob 's urgent tone halted my reverie i ca n't believe it you just walked by jake , our fitness director you see every day but this time , you did n't even see him ! you 're doing this a lot you 're losing it ! i'm really afraid harrumping , i headed for the vegetable aisle i was just thinking i said , more than a little defensively you do n't think there 's anything the matter , do you ? i stopped , suddenly upset i do n't know , i said i do n't think i'm losing it of course , neither does a dear friend 's husband who is definitely in the tragic grip of dementia he ca n't understand why she wo n't let him drive or why she has hired caregivers to be with him when she ca n't be am i in similar denial ? i got an email from kim this morning my husband and i had a spat yesterday and i do n't even remember what it was about , she wrote i think somewhere along the way , one of us said something about alzheimer 's and i think about the ghosts and goblins of older age when we were young , we feared monsters in our closets and alligators under the bed when we were a little older , some of us feared that we would n't lose our virginity before a nuclear holocaust would blow up the world still later , some of us feared not finding a good job or true love or not making it to retirement now that we 're retired , there are new fears losing our senses , our mobility , our independence and so many of our spats and squabbles these days are around those with themes like why do n't you take better care of yourself ? why do n't you seek medical help for something that could be so easily fixed ? why do n't you keep more active mentally and physically so you do n't lose it ? behind so many of these sentiments is an urgent fear the fear of decline , disease and death , the fear of losing each other in so many ways in the days to come and sometimes these fears collide with fierce denial or fearful self examination could i really need a hearing aid ? am i not as sharp as i used to be ? is this the beginning of the big decline ? and so we go around and around with our concerns and our fears and our denials with a sense of anticipatory loss and grief as we spar with each other bob and i were still discussing my possible decline yesterday as we unloaded groceries from the back of our new suv i'm leaving the hatchback up because i'm going back for the bags of cat litter , he told me as we left the garage i nodded , still irritated and anxious , wondering if he might be right about my losing it seven hours later , my cell phone rang kathy , are you all right ? it was the voice of our next door neighbor judith carl and i noticed your garage door and car hatchback open when we left the house at this afternoon , she said we just got back it 's and your garage door and car hatchback are still wide open bob ! i called , barely suppressing my giggles of glee you forgot to get the cat litter , close the car and the garage ! oh , jeez ! he muttered , rushing past me and between my chuckles , the worry sprang up i wondered is he losing it ? such a minor thing so easy to forget something like that it 's probably nothing but still since we 've been talking about losses and i made the decision then and there as we all do day to day to simply feel blessed that today , right now , we 're okay , competent and in love we may walk a bit more slowly we may not hear each other as well we may be a little forgetful but , for today , we 're just fine we have no guarantees about next year , next week or even tomorrow but today , right this minute , life is undeniably good