you know you 're getting old when kindness replaces indifference in total strangers , when your white hair inspires altruism in others in some ways , assumptions related to my appearance are nothing new i 've always looked older than my true age since childhood i 'll never forget the young navy veteran i met at sawyer 's school of business where my parents sent me to learn typing one summer many years ago he was in his twenties , newly discharged from the service and taking business courses he was also looking for a girlfriend despite his good looks and charm , i was not interested trying , nevertheless , to make conversation with me one day , he asked if i was headed back to college or to work after our summer classes ended my jaw dropped college ? i gasped i 'll be in sixth grade this fall ! the shock was evident on his face how old are you anyway ? i'm eleven i 've never seen someone disappear so quickly it was just the beginning of a lifetime of looking older than my years i won a california state acting competition at the age of sixteen playing the role of a year old woman i was never carded at bars when i was in college my hair started turning gray well before my th birthday and so , as i settled into middle age , unasked for senior citizen discounts became routine they started coming when i was in my late forties and seriously graying one evening bob and i went to a local sizzler for dinner the check was less than we expected i mentioned this to the cashier oh , she smiled that 's because i gave you the senior citizen discount ! my husband , a year older than i and undiscounted , could barely contain his laughter as we walked to a table she 's probably thinking 'what a nice guy taking his dear mother out to dinner , ' he snickered we 've got a barbara and poppy bush thing going here i gave him a hard nudge in the ribs two days later , i was telling my fellow therapists at a family counseling center about the incident lavaris harris , an african american therapist who was close to my age , but with impossibly youthful good looks , was sympathetic nonetheless she asked if i 'd like to grab a quick lunch we hit jack in the box for fajita pitas as we were walking away from the cashier to a table , the young cashier called me back wait , ma'am ! i forgot to give you the silver discount ! despite her compassionate thoughts for me , lavaris doubled over with laughter and could hardly wait to get back to the counseling center so she could tell everyone that i had received yet another unsolicited senior discount now , of course , i am well into the age range for legitimate senior discounts now i have white hair and lately the concessions to my age have been more extreme when leaving to visit my cousins in kansas city recently , my first clue that this was n't going to be an ordinary journey started in security as i was removing my shoes oh , honey ! a screener greeted me with a smile that 's okay did n't you see the sign ? those born in or before do n't have to remove their shoes so keep your shoes on ! i paused , confused i was born in i did n't want to embarrass her i also did n't want to get caught sneaking with shoes on through security when my id clearly stated that i was under i smiled back , thanked her and quietly told her that , despite my appearance , i was still young enough to need to remove my shoes then , after boarding the plane , i was lifting my suitcase to the upper bin quite competently , i thought but another passenger a young woman , interestingly enough rushed forward oh , let me help you ! she said , grabbing my bag and deftly stowing it in the overhead bin i thanked her warmly while wondering if i had been looking frail or if simply the sight of a white haired woman hefting a suitcase had prompted her kindness when i returned to phoenix the other day , i was the recipient of two other kind offers as i walked from the gate toward baggage claim at sky harbor airport briskly , i thought an airport employee with an electric cart asked if i 'd like a ride i declined with oh , no , but thank you ! this is my exercise for today ! and i walked on faster than usual just to show him or was it to show myself that i'm not really slowing down ? and when i was outside baggage claim , curbside , waiting for bob to pick me up , i briefly noticed a young couple , both with canes , sitting on a bench nearby the young woman got up , leaning heavily on her cane , and smiled at me would you like to sit down ? she asked i thanked her , but declined , wondering if i was looking especially geriatric that day i think i am looking rather geriatric these days even if i still feel like a visitor and not a full time resident of a rapidly aging body i do have my moments like challenging my husband to an arm wrestling competition and winning ! like schlepping a whole trunk load of groceries into the house in one trip like swimming laps at a fast clip for an hour there are times i entertain the notion of lying about my age by inflating it have you seen those t shirts that say things like sixty and sexy or seventy and sensational i 'd feel silly wearing one of those because i do n't look especially sexy or sensational for but ? if i got a t shirt saying i was in my eighties , maybe people would say wow ! you look great for ! you do n't look a day over ! really ! we all have our dreams but this recent glut of good will coming my way from fellow travelers and airport officials has given me pause i 've been moved by the kindness and respect of strangers i 've been surprised that it has been , most often , young women who have volunteered to help and i 've been humbled by the fact that they may have seen something i ca n't let myself see or feel or admit that maybe i do n't lift suitcases or balance or walk with the same assurance that i did when i was younger even thinking such thoughts is akin to my shock when i look in a mirror and see my mother 's face and i stop with surprise and bemusement and a touch of sadness yes , the years take a toll i am looking noticeably older my aging is no longer an act or an illusion it 's a fact and yet i still feel so young and strong and positively frisky inside !