courtesy wikipedia the theory that alzheimer 's dementia is in part caused by metabolic syndrome is fairly well known in the paleoblogosphere and literature i touch upon it now more for the sake of completeness than to try to explore anything new and mind blowing at least for the first part of the series also , i always learn a bit more about neurobiology when i dig a little into these subjects as much as i love and appreciate my several regular readers , much of this blog is a selfish endeavor today , though , i 'll start with one of my favorite secondary sources good calories , bad calories fats , carbs , and the controversial science of diet and health vintage by gary taubes he has a whole chapter on dementia , cancer , and aging pages if you are following along in the hard copy which i bought directly after seeing mr taubes interviewed on the colbert report back in if it were n't for watching that interview , i might have tried counting calories or something really silly rather than consulting a paleolithic friendly nutritionist in order to lose the last of the baby weight at the beginning of this year , and then none of this would have happened so thank you , stephan colbert i just put a big hunk of pastured butter to melt into my local grown vegetable soup simmered with grassfed cow marrow bones , and i owe it all to you here 's the theory hypertension , atherosclerosis , smoking , and apo e increase the risk of cardiovascular disease , vascular dementia obviously vascular dementia is generally thought to be caused my multiple and increasing stepwise vascular insults to the brain , like little strokes or clots and alzheimer 's dementia which is associated with excess tau and amyloid protein build up in the brain , like a fish tank that never gets cleaned folks with type diabetes have twice the risk of developing alzheimer 's , and diabetics on insulin therapy have four times the risk there 's a protein called insulin degrading enzyme that does just what you might expect it clears out insulin in the brain it also clears out excess amyloid at least in test tubes , so one can imagine if it were super busy with the insulin , amyloid might get left cluttering up the joint unlucky mice with no insulin degrading enzyme get dementia , and elderly people get increased amyloid in their cerebral spinal fluid when insulin is injected into their veins the obvious conclusion is that once wants low insulin levels so that your insulin degrading enzyme can keep itself busy with the pesky amyloid , leaving none to form plaques one way to achieve that is a low carbohydrate diet even the high carbohydrate kitavans , though , had exceedingly low fasting insulin levels , so a paleolithic style diet will seem to do the trick if you do n't have metabolic syndrome to begin with , whether low or high carb if you have a bit of high blood pressure and some tub about the waist , you might want to skip the squash and go straight for the meat and butter but forget the refined carbohydrates they do not love your brain is alzheimer 's disease increasing ? yes , absolutely would n't it be nice if we could do something about it ? the national institutes of health convened a panel earlier this year , who determined there is no reliable way to prevent alzheimer 's i can see myself at the back of the room , frantically waving my hand the kitavans have no dementia ! i would say would there be raised eyebrows ? puzzlement ? a security team called to escort me off the premises ? evolutionary medicine can sometimes be very lonely today 's vegetable soup carrots small blue potato winter squash , peeled and seeded beet , peeled onion pieces of celery tomatillos tbs pastured butter maybe three ? glop of olive oil marrow bones from grassfed cow celtic salt , dulse , basil , garlic , pepper , seasoned salt or whatever to taste chop veggies and cover with filtered water in large pot , add marrow bones roast first for best flavor , but no biggie if you do n't add spices , oil bring to boil and simmer for minutes or so remove bones , making sure the good stuff has dissolved into the soup remove from heat for a bit blend to pleasing chunkiness with stick blender return to heat , melt in butter cool somewhat eat servings three ? calories ? ? ? ? nutrient ratios ? ? ? ?