one post in the entire month of february ? i know , right ? ! the truth is , i 've been pretty checked out of everything i tell most people that what i'm in right now is a funk more accurately , i'm in the midst of a depressive episode i 've suffered from major depressive disorder most of my life , sprinkled with bits of generalized anxiety and post traumatic stress i 've been in and out of therapy for what feels like forever , and up until about a year ago , i could have sworn the stuff would never work for me fortunately i am in treatment , and i have a rad therapist which brings me to wonder , why in the hell did i decide to be a therapist ? at nyu , we had a presentation that kicked off our professional development day , and a few of the speakers touched on the topic of secondary trauma it got me thinking a lot about how i 've been processing stress my placement aside , i 've been experiencing a lot of loss in my personal life that coupled with the stories i have to hear and process at work it 's a lot for me to handle being only months into this gig it makes perfect sense too , because as studies have shown , listening to traumatic stories will cause trauma for the listener or secondary trauma for the month of february , i really disconnected from a lot of this social work stuff it 's not to say i 've been up to nothing more on that later i really need a chance to recharge my batteries , to get myself up and running again post burn out this whole situation though has me wondering if i am struggling this month during grad school , what is my career going to be like ? how can i possibly hold down a job ? how can i ethically allow my patients to count on me when i could at any moment spiral into another depressive episode and need to take this time to recharge ? recharging and time away from things is absolutely vital for my depression how do i prepare my clients for this without causing doubt in their minds about quality of treatment or going a little deep in the self disclosure wing ? sometimes i wonder , maybe i should n't be a social worker but the reality is , there is n't much else i can do first , i would be doing social worky type of work regardless of whether or not i was a social worker at least this way i can get paid for it secondly , what field besides social work is going to be as accommodating to mental illness ? can you see me walking up to an investment banker boss and saying yo boss , i have this disability that you ca n't see , and i swear i'm not lazy , but i really need some time off to get my shit together oh hell no ! i 'd be fired on the spot i wo n't even get into right now about how being fat complicates my depression in so many ways in the health advocacy and social work scene , my disability , while sometimes misunderstood , is still respected most everywhere i 've dealt with this has been willing to work something out so i guess , really , i'm in the best possible spot that does n't mean i am going to stop thinking about these issues dealing with your own mental health issues as a social worker i think is a really unique thing i am really fascinated about how to best approach this with client relationships do any of you have experience with this sort of thing ? how did you approach it ? if you do n't have experience with this necessarily , how do you approach needing to temporarily break a client relationship , due to health issues or a death in the family or anything that will cause you to be away for some time ? how do you do that without damaging the relationship ?