welcome to my top ten posts for ! each year , i like to include the posts that have the most hits over the last days hope you enjoy and please feel free to share with your colleagues ! ! high school counseling websites check out some great websites , blogs , and resources for high school counselors ! ! my new counseling tools for tools include twitter , schedule once , qr codes , remind , livebinders , visual ly , haiku deck , and voki become a tech savvy counselor in view the awesome videos created by erin mason on how to use some of the most popular tech tools available to school counselors these tools include twitter , livebinders , google drive , smore , and remind out of the box red ribbon tools check out some great ideas on how to promote your red ribbon campaign using some new and creative ideas view my other posts on red ribbon week ideas check my newest post from this october the ultimate over the top campaign for red ribbon week scariest moments in school counseling read about some of my scariest moments over the years as a high school counselor some of the events are quite unbelievable ! ! a tutorial on responding to high conflict parents this is one of my newer posts that got a lot of hits from school counselors ! seems that that many school professionals are interested in this topic ! ! stay tuned to more posts on handling conflict in schools as a school counselor looking for warm bodies this posts looks at how we can work with freshmen at the beginning of the school year go gaga for google this post is an overview of a presentation conducted by russ sabella at he american school counselor conference on the effectiveness of using google in your counseling practice the most interesting high school counselors on twitter check out some of the best of the best on twitter ! ! rockin tech tools for school counselors some of my new tech tool loves include portfoliyo , school circle , volunteer spot , pinterest , and emaze ! ! want to know the top posts from ? view my post here ! top posts of