okay , i admit it ! i am a child of the s as i am sitting here watching a marathon of behind the music , i am transported back to the days of aqua net , spandex , and my musical idols if you lived during this era , you may remember the larger than life artists and bands who ruled the airwaves at the time like madonna , prince , michael jackson , whitney houston , motley crue , journey , and list goes on and on while watching the series today , i noticed an interesting feature on some of the shows , the producers interviewed current artists who discussed how their music was influenced by these superstars therefore , these artists took their heroes' influences and perfected their own craft musical influences of contemporary artists you may be asking what does this have to do with school counselors ? since my mind works in some unusual ways , i will put it together for you over the years , there has been a lot of backbreaking groundwork and publicity to enhance the status of school counselors this work has been accomplished by dedicated members of our national organization , the american school counseling association , the leadership of many state organizations go georgia ! , former and present school counselors , and counselor educators see the timeline history of counseling by daclan habeck since becoming involved in sccrowd , scchat , hscchat , i have found a lot of knowledgeable and influential school counselors and counselor educators that i stalk regularly in my opinion , these educators are my counseling idols and deserve public recognition for their work and contributions in the field of school counseling ! ! so , if you want to expand your counseling skills , check out my counseling rock stars ! ! my counseling rock stars for high school counselors blogging stars danielle schultz tracy jackson elizabeth cranford creativity stars carol miller traci brown technology stars erin mason jeff ream leadership stars tim conway jeremy goldman education stars raychelle lohmann julia taylor patrick o'connor data stars trish hatch franciene sabens russ sabella professional development stars susan spellman cann ross wolfson amber shepherd thompson top blogs need professional development check out these school counselor professional development for high school counselors school counselor crowd high school counselor chat school counselor chat do you have a fav counselor that you follow ? post your counselor crush so i to add him or her to our list ! !