one of my passions as a school counselor is to train students to help their peers in fact , i feel that all educators should promote peer helping well , a girl can dream ca n't she ! whether you are currently involved in a peer helper program , support a program in your school , or have been thinking about a program , this post is for you ! here 's an idea if you have a program ! have a program and need ideas ? the national association of peer program professionals is sponsoring its nd annual peer helping recognition week during the month of march during this week , you can promote the work of your program to students and staff members to help with your week 's activities , nappp has created a kit that you can download on their website here are some of the items included in the kit sample proclamation national peer helper week logo sample media posts suggested activities including create wear a peer helper t shirt , develop a video about your program , hold a ceremony , throw a party , or host special event sample ceremony script after your event , nappp asks that schools post their pictures to their face book page to show your spirit ! ! need some more ideas ? here are a few ideas from my friends at the jennifer claire moore foundation create and share a video about peer helping i am me bullying awareness video from bay minette middle school in bay minette , al hold an event create your own peer helping event like the one that the jennifer clair moore foundation sponsored last year this event was called the peer helper jubliee and over students met at a local theater to talk about learn how to identify bullying i have provided instructions for creating your own event ! jubilee guidebook do n't have a clue about how to set up a program ? attend a training ! if are clueless on how to start a program , consider attending a peer helping training i did this many years ago and it help tremendously ! check out these conferences in east coast th national peer helping conference feb rd th , point clear , al grand marriott west coast peer resource training san francisco , ca next training is in august central us pal peer assisted leadership , texas dates varies check website nappp summer institute , indianapolis summer , live outside the us no worries ! australia peer skills , australia canada peer resources , canada ca n't get to one of these training institutes ? check out other helpful training resources other helpful resources when you want to start a program adl anti defamation league peer program professionals website peer resources for our canadian friends my peer toolkit for our australian friends cool schools for our new zealand friends peer program professionals facebook page peer helper resources livebinder peer program network facebook page jennifer claire moore foundation peer programs peer resource training training peer helpers search institute canadian student leadership association natural helpers safe , healthy schools roseville high school peer helper program peer helping resources for colleges peer resource network pals students helping students tapping the power of peer helping , b varenhorst k peer helping , julie champion peer net british columbia teacher tube videos you can also reach out to me if you need assistance ! i am always willing to help and will come to your school district for training please share this information with others if you are willing ! oh , i would love to hear your ideas ! !