yes , it is true i made the decision not to go to asca this year and it was difficult in this post , i will share why i made the decision and how i can still stay connected to the conference asca in orlando was awesome ! i got to meet up with my tweeps i will miss seeing them this year , i presented at a preconference workshop , i heard the first lady speak , i got to be searched by the secret service , and most of all , i learned a lot of great information to take back to my school me at the tweet up ! i made it rain in my presentation literally the roof leaked initially , i had planned to go to asca , but i have the opportunity to attend the innovative counseling strategies national conference in my hometown of atlanta since both conferences are during the same time , i had to make a quick decision about which one i wanted to attend this year , my hometown won out and i will be staying in the atl ! however , i realize that i do n't have to miss the great information that will be shared at asca ! there are several opportunities to listen to and be part of the action in phoenix and i want to share them with you in case you cannot attend the conference as well phoenix , az since i ca n't make the conference i can view information about the sessions online or through the asca app ! i can register as a virtual attendee although the virtual sessions are , you get a lot of bang for your buck ! here are the scheduled programs sunday , june th p m college admissions case studies and recommendation letters high school p m college and career readiness leadership strategies p m key note address by fredi lajvardi monday , june th a m reach higher with college and career readiness resources a m p m career exploration with cartoons p m a conversation with carolyn stone p m school counselor outreach vs automated messaging to mitigate summer melt p m equip first generation college students with college readiness skills tuesday , june a m general session , keynote address tim shriver a m p m academic habits and college and career readiness p m a college and career readiness conversation with cory notestine and liz parker p m school counselors the key to college and career readiness p m mindsets behaviors competency writing wednesday , july a m selecting a college for its financial fit a m p m general session , keynote speaker tim federle i will definitely follow the conference from twitter posts using notatasca see the storyboard from last year 's online conference compliments of connie ward i got a lot of great information from the post and i was at the conference ! ! also , check out the blogs from the spirited school counselor , elizabeth cranford , school counselor space , franciene sabens , middle school counselor notes , rick scheibner , life on the fly counselor , angela poovey stoify by susan spellman cann day notes , downloads resources day asca notes , downloads websites day notes , downloads , websites , and resources school counselor as leader tweets from program marketing top moments from asca much to celebrate storify notatasca resources other asca memories ! ! asca asca conference workshops watch a workshop from last year from asca first lady 's address asca post asca depression now is the time to start thinking about attending an asca conference in case you have never been to one the asca conference will be in new orleans this will be my first trip to nola ! july , asca annual conference the recipe for success new orleans , la the counseling geek , jeff ream , and the middle school counselor , carol miller are sponsoring asca donation drive for school counselors consider sponsoring a school counselor or consider applying for the scholarship ! ! asca donation drive ca n't make it in no worries here are the locations of future asca conferences july , denver , colo july , los angeles , calif june july , boston , mass june , seattle , wash