this summer has been incredibly hectic therefore , i have n't had as much time as i would have liked to contribute to my blog sigh now that my summer is coming to an end yes , my summer is over poconos today , i wanted to write about my highlights from following the asca conference as a nonparticipant aka notatasca sitting on the couch unless you have been living under a rock , you may have heard about a little conference that occurred in new orleans last week although i could n't attend it was my anniversary trip to the poconos , i was able to follow the twitter posts to find out all the latest news and resources the purpose of this post is to share with other non attenders what i learned highlights from asca asca new orleans highlight i found a new counseling rock star to follow last year , i wrote a post about following counseling rock stars who have made great contributions to elementary , middle , and high school from their awesome blogs see the post below superstar counselors to follow well , i am super excited to add another star to this list , rebecca atkins rebecca is the author of the blog , counselor up , and i have included a link to her blog although she focuses on elementary school counselors , she offers a lot of great resources that can be useful to any school counselor for instance , check out her post on making your email box a happy place ! highlight okay , school counselors really posted some awesome quotes ! following twitter , i found a lot of t shirt worthy quotes from the conference i decided to make some posters for my office ! ! if kim kardashian can be useful , anyone can be useful ! children do not walk into their futures they create them ! school counselors are fortune makers for our children critics math compliments criticism criticism highlight of course , the resources are always a big hit ! ! here are some outstanding resources , articles , and presentations that were shared by school counselors on twitter career assessments free career development resources career and counseling readiness tool new york counseling by the letters ecological model of professional school counseling research ethical standards for school counselors asca fostering a caring relationship article guide to counseling theories high functioning depression do n't overlook it media literacy for school counselors the dos and do n'ts of giving media interviews perception deception website professional development for school counselors supervising school counselors presentation teaching traumatized students technology toolkit for school counselors presentation what is wrong with i messages creating and using badges in your career unit what school counselors do also , check out additional asca resources on my twitter storify highlight love the takeaways from the conference ! what 's on your bucket list for next year ? resources for school counselors highlight the chats ! ! i love the chats before , during , and after the conference ! ! this year i was honored to co host the notatasca chat with danielle schultz if you do n't know about danielle , she is one of the original school counselor bloggers who is somewhat of a legend check out and follow her blog , school counseling blog the legend , danielle shultz also , check out my blog on notatasca ! so , did you miss the conference this year ? no worries ! ! next year 's conference will be in denver ! ! only more days to go ! ! asca , denver co