yes , i am sad to say that i missed asca again this year unfortunately , i can only afford one conference per year and asca did not fit in my budget so , i vicariously attended the asca i wanted to ride the bus ! ! conference through the tweets , posts , and pictures of school counselors who attended from around the country through social media , i could feel the excitement and the positive connections made at the conference so being at home as a stalker , i decide that i wanted to share the highlights with other school counselors who were not able to attend the conference aka notatasca highlight motivational speakers asca was not short on motivational speakers ! ! astronaut mark kelly started the asca conference and lit up twitter ! about mark kelly carol dweck presented great information on mindsets revisits the growth mindset probably the most talked about speaker was dr calvin mackie and his encouragement for school counselors ! about dr mackie highlight most talked about presentations ! okay , there is no way i can include every great presentation , but i wanted to include those that had the most frequent posts on social media by school counselors at asca some of the most mentioned topics on social media included mindfulness , mindsets , suicide awareness , and technology katrice grant keep calm and implement mindfulness in your school what is mindfulness ? mindfulness is maintaining a present moment awareness of our thoughts , feelings , body sensations , or surrounding environment benefits of mindfulness lowers stress improves impulse control improves focus and concentration increases self awareness develops empathy improves sleep improves ability to manage emotions want to know how mindfulness impacts the brain ? go to this link for more information ! how to bring mindfulness to your school community ? according to katrice there are four steps you must become familiar with mindfulness by practicing it become trained in delivering mindfulness to others bring mindfulness into your sessions with students adopt a classroom and deliver as a lesson how to become skilled in mindfulness ? the steps in becoming trained in mindfulness include taking a week long training in two courses these courses include mindfulness fundamentals weeks mindful educator essentials weeks how to incorporate mindfulness see the mindfulness action plan below mindfulness action plan additional resources for training personal practice free resources palouse mindfulness headspace free day introduction calm com training programs mindful schools center for adolescent studies free course ! videos for introducing mindfulness to teens summer perhay kuba mindset matters growing young minds summer introduces the differences between a fixed and growth mindset in her presentation what are these differences ? fixed mindset this is the belief that intelligence , personality , and characteristics of a person are static growth mindset this is the belief that intelligence , personality , and characteristics of a person can be continuously developed kuba presented information on how students with a fixed mindset differ from students with a growth mindset mindset resources you can grow your intelligence jenny cureton , diane stutey , and janessa henniger school suicide training there were several presentations on self harm and suicide this presentation contained important federal and asca guidelines , school faculty training , and resources reasons why how school counselors can help model school prevention on suicide suicide prevention statutes schools julia taylor and erin o'malley suicide , self harm , social media helping students ask for help this presentation covered the asca ethical standards regarding suicide which includes informing parents when there is a potential risk consultation with other professionals contact appropriate authorities in addition , the presenters covered media attention on suicide and the statistics on adolescent suicide following information about statistics and the idea of contagion , the presenters covered barriers for students when asking for help these barriers include feelings of hopelessness many do n't know what is wrong fear of not being helped stigma by others previous negative experiences when reaching out fear of not being believed lack of trusted adults lack of confidentiality fear of consequences last , taylor and o'malley covered what school counselors can do for suicide prevention intervention some suggestions were staff education awareness campaigns angela cleveland school counselor technology toolbox angela gave school counselors a tutorial on how technology can enhance a school counselor 's job technology tool twitter angela covered the basics from using a hashtag to school counselors to follow on twitter she added informed school counselors about twitter chats like scchat st wednesday of each month pm psychat every monday pm i am going to start attending this one ! ! technology tool pinterest angela introduced school counselor to other school counselors with amazing boards technology tool doodle this is a calendar program that makes scheduling easy ! technology tool powtoon angela reviewed how to make a cartoon presentation with this tool technology tool social media groups angela introduced school counselors to the various groups on social media want to see more of her presentation ? angela has shared it on her website nicohl shelton webb hype your school counseling program with tech savvy tools technology tool emaze emaze is an alternate form of presenting information that rivals power point technology tool qr codes go to website to present your information to your audience then download your code technology tool edpuzzle edpuzzle is a site that allows you to select a video and to customize it technology tool blendspace blendspace is a site that allows you to create digital lessons technology tool smore smore is a great site for creating and sharing newsletters , events , and information technology tool blogs here is a list of nichol 's favorite blogs she included mine ! http savvyschoolcounselor com http www thecollegesolution com tag high school counselor http forhighschoolcounselors blogspot com http entirelyelementary blogspot com http www elementaryschoolcounseling org http www schcounselor com http www schoolcounselingbyheart com http creativeelementaryschoolcounselor blogspot com http elemschoolcounselor blogspot com http jyjoynercounselor blogspot com samantha latham , kloe rosso , regan estess , and jennifer curry using pop culture references to engage students in career and college readiness development using gottfredson 's theory of circumscription and compromise linda gottfredson , , the presenters discussed how this theory relates to the stages of childhood development for high school students , the presenters referenced the movies as divergent , hunger games , and the help highlight great quotes from asca and notatasca asca amy egizil do n't confuse my passion with anger passion contains an unspeakable hope calvin mackie one of my new heroes counselor carey what if we gave grades of not yet instead of f 's donna clark instead of asking what 's wrong with you ask what happened to you a better way to support students with life trauma elizabeth bostick your work will change lives yet unborn ! calvin mackie franciene sabens counselors greeting students in the morning when they leave makes a huge impact franciene sabens there is never a reason to not communicate w those you work with timely accurate communication jeannie maddox i think following virtually gets better each year the willingness to share is what makes our community so awesome dr mackie julie baumgart fail not yet carol dweck laura ross it matters to students if you know their name ! sylinda banks notatasca connie ward johnson i think following virtually gets better each year the willingness to share is what makes our community so awesome erin mason i love that people like fsabens feel the pain of those of us not there and work so hard to share virtually ! erin mason let 's just call it what it is , a school counseling mutual admiration society ! chris belser my ascaenvy is strong after seeing all of the posts and pics from denver have fun , everyone ! liz vohar was in the car answering questions ! home some champagne to celebrate years of marriage ! ty for the convo tonight ! melissa arrigotti counselors are uniquely qualified to give our kids the hope they need to change the world highlight big announcements from asca school counselors at a ramp school get free asca membership while at a school with current ramp status car give away ! ! the winner of the refurbished mazda rx was sarah crist of charlotte mecklenburg schools in n c school counseling community scholarship here is a promo for school counselors to see if you would like to contribute or apply ! highlight missed asca ? keep up by viewing these resources ! social media highlights from asca https www hashatit com hashtags asca notes from asca shared by jeff ream asca notes other resources after suicide toolkit schools conversation starters evidence based school counselor conference north tahoe high school college and career counseling resources student career profile flipbook highlight notatasca chat i was honored to co host the notatasca chat with dr erin mason see the transcript below ! notatascachat highlight asca ! goodbye denver and hello los angeles for asca ! goodbye school counselors ! theme reach for the stars ! never attended an asca conference ? it is never too late to start making preparations ! check out these blog posts for attending the asca conference in los angeles tips for asca first timer counselor clique five more asca tips for the noob jeff ream highlight making connections after the conference through social media just because asca is over does n't mean you ca n't keep the conversation going ! join sccrowd ! hope fingers crossed to see you in los angeles ! !