me miserable at home notatasca sigh i ca n't be at the asca conference this year ! ! unfortunately , this is the second year in a row that i have not been able to make the conference to meet up with all the amazing counselors from social media or hear all the awesome presentations while that stinks for me , i am so happy for all of the school counselors who will be going and will be re energized from all the great information and camaraderie in new orleans ! if you are like me and ca n't go to asca , do n't fret ! for several years , there have been great efforts made by asca and non asca participants to provide school counselors with the conference in the comfort of their own homes so , how is this possible ? well , read on and you will learn how to be a notatasca attendee ! ! become a notatasca attendee first , if you ca n't physically be at asca , you can be a virtual attendee go to the asca conference website and sign up to be a virtual attendee it does cost , but it is not as expensive as a hotel , airfare , and food well , you get it danielle schultz second , follow the conference hashtags which include asca , notatasca , and scchat during the conference , many attendees will post their pictures , notes , and insights with these hashtags so non attendees can get the latest information to follow on twitter , set up your feed for asca and notatasca on hootsuite or tweetdeck the amazing danielle schultz wrote a very informative blog on how to participate in notatasca from last year also , check out last year 's notatasca chat hosted by dr erin mason and danielle schultz last year 's chat hosted by danielle and erin third , read about the upcoming conference to get some excitement pumping through your veins see the june scchat transcript about asca scchat asca fourth , i am excited to announce that danielle schultz and i will host the notatasca chat in addition , we will be signing up volunteers to share information from conference attendees during the week of the asca conference details will be posted soon on twitter ! ! planning for asca okay , interested in going to asca , but lack the funds ? ? ? check out some ideas from other school counselors on how they were able to finance their trip to nola and beyond get ready for next year 's conference in denver , co ! ! july , some school counselors picked up second jobs and held garage sales check out franciene sabens' ideas on how she was able to raise funds to go to asca and asca ever wish for a fairy godmother to magically finance your trip to asca ? well , there is a group of school counselors who have made this happen for several school counselors ! check out the link to the counseling geek 's site to the school counselor community scholarship website to donate to school counselors who needed additional funds to attend asca see this year 's eight winners ! ! dylan hackbarth , como park senior high school st paul , mn emily weber , turner hill elementary school turnwater , wa jocelyn casalou , challenge preparatory charter school far rockaway , ny jessica kamber , roberto clemente elementary school allentown , pa amy wheeler , conservatory lab charter school brighton , ma shauna williams , blue ridge high school new milford , pa laura ross , five forks middle school lawrenceville , ga erin rebling , indian valley elementary lewistown , pa the sccs scholarship is a great way to give to other school counselors so please consider donating to the sccs scholarship ! where are future asca conferences ? of course , it is not too early to plan ahead now is the time to think about saving those extra funds or selling the importance of attending asca to your administrator fortunately , i have a very understanding and supportive administrator , but there was a time this was not the case if you fall under the later , here is great justification letter for you to submit to your leadership go to the asca website to download your justification letter in case you are planning ahead , here are the locations for asca from ! ! hope to see you there ! july , los angeles , calif june july , boston , mass june , seattle , wash