ah , a new decade ! i just love the smell of corruption and slow decay in the morning , do n't you ? and as i savor the scent of america 's inexorable slide toward second world oblivion , i find myself waxing nostalgic for another decade one where we were still on top when people feared us you know the decade i'm talking about yes , it was the s ! oh , the s ! when greed was still innocent ! when corruption finally came out of the closet and took its rightful place as the global drug of choice , right alongside cocaine and proxy warfare god , how i miss it so ! you remember the s , right ? the cold war reaganomics junk bonds the delorean and of course , what would s nostalgia be without the music ? now , before you say boy george or , god forbid , flock of seagulls , let me remind you that s music was n't all synthesizers and hair gel there were some kick ass bands in the s most of my punk rock friends with green mohawks and black leather jackets took musical sustenance from the most unlikely source no , it was n't new wave or death metal oddly enough , it was reggae ! i remember seeing an interview with members of blondie a few years ago deborah harry talked about how heart of glass was originally written as a reggae tune , with a skank and some sort of funky bass line their producer made them change it to the glitterball version that made them famous i wish i could hear the original interesting that a new york punk band would find such inspiration in a culture and style of music so opposite from their own one man who 's done much to propel reggae from its backwoods jamaican origins and into the modern era is steel pulse front man david hinds if bob marley brought reggae to the unwashed , tie dye wearing hippie masses , then hinds successfully infused it with slick , urban , hipster style , truly making reggae music part of new wave pop culture with the international success of 's true democracy , hinds suddenly found himself in the company of other greats like peter tosh , sly and robbie , and black uhuru 's michael rose he had become a true reggae superstar think you have what it takes to be a reggae superstar like david hinds ? tired of your dull , forced daily routine , droning out your monotone existence in a cube somewhere ? then it 's time to step up , my friend ! just follow these easy steps , and soon you 'll be smoking kind bud on the beach in st kitts , watching string bikinis , and fathering illegitimate children with the best of them the clothes to be a reggae superstar , you must throw out your drab , corporate wardrobe and dress like a human peacock gone is the dull navy and olive business casual attire get rid of those khaki chinos from l l bean you got for christmas burn your dockers sweater vests , and for god 's sake , toss out your ties , unless they have whales or pot leaves on them think big ! think bold ! typical david hinds stage attire florescent yellow jogging suit bright orange tennis shoes knit rasta scarf red , gold , and green foot column of dreadlocks on top of his head , covered with bright blue cloth bag huge , ray ban sunglasses shameless self promotion reggae superstars are not known for their reticence or modesty be sure to talk yourself up at every opportunity you must become immune to shame and embarrassment make sure everyone knows about your greatness , your limitless talent , and your exploits with women give details another s phenomenon , rap music , owes reggae a debt of gratitude cent may not know it , but his get rich or die tryin' gangsta rhymes about rolling in his 'cad , sipping gin and juice , and capping motherfuckers with his gat have their roots in jamaican style toasting an early precursor to modern rap , toasting is a boastful , rhythmic chanting where the toaster talks about how bad ass and cool they are , and if you fuck with them , how they 'll be forced to cap your ass , albeit somewhat regretfully think peter tosh 's steppin' razor you 're welcome , cent ! to achieve reggae superstardom , you must master the art of boasting and toasting talent plus a kick ass band wearing dashiki print momma africa shirts and dreadlocks may get you laid at the local frat party , but it wo n't get you famous for that , you 'll need actual talent and a great band to back you up impressive in his own right , hinds was lucky enough to have one of the tightest , most professional reggae bands in the world i got to see them play twice at the rainbow theater in denver , co during the s their introduction before they took the stage at one show was , there are reggae bands , and there are reggae bands , and there are reggae bands , and then there 's steel pulse ! how true it is they put on one of the best concerts i 've ever seen , and that includes other s heavyweights like talking heads , peter gabriel , joan armitrading , and the who so , to sum up , you need clothes , a gregarious , self promoting attitude , and talent of the , the most crucial is obviously talent there are plenty of brightly clothed , gorgeously dreadlocked , arrogant superstar wannabes sweeping floors and deep frying chicken for a living so work on that toasting !