the internet is a double edged sword it is wonderful , yet more of a world of widening webs i am really enjoying this writing blogging thing if i could post without going on the internet , i would publish a new article every single day however , i must admit , the wondering www dot is taking a toll on my positive body image no matter what i do , i can t figure out how to blog without checking my facebook news feed for me , too much facebook equals low self esteem and even though i love keeping in touch with people , it can really knock me off balance if i am not careful each time i post a new blog entry , i scroll through my never ending literally ! home page and look at everyone s pictures besides feeling like it is a waste of time , i can t stop comparing myself to others people post pictures of themselves in new clothes , selfies in front of their mirrors , at the beach , or even prego pictures at such and such weeks if i could look at pictures without feeling jealous , i would i even feel a twinge of guilty envy when i see beautiful mothers and their beautiful babies i don t look as good as she does in those shorts i wish i could wear a dress like that i could never do my hair like that she is so pretty she is so funny wow she worked out for an hour in the rain ? that s a great comment i could never be that witty she is so skinny and she is months pregnant i could never look like that her kids are adorable how does she keep it all together and still manage to look like a movie star ? she takes really great pictures she could be a professional after the dust has settled , i admit that facebook causes me to feel like a fat failure i have to be honest with myself and decide if it s causing me more unnecessary damage if that is the case , then bye bye facebook the internet seems to undo all the positive steps i take i am trying my hardest to get rid of the unrealistic expectations i place on myself so much of my anxiety comes from my perfectionist tendencies and extremely high standards motivation is a good thing if it promotes action but when the expectations get too ridiculous , it can be crippling the reason we struggle with insecurity is because we compare our behind the scenes with everyone else s highlight reel steve furtick from my tiny buddha article click here if you missed it ! facebook is all about showing your best side to the world it has highlight reel written all over it i am working up the courage to deactivate my facebook account i am not ready to do that yet , but if it continues to affect me negatively , then i will famous last words i do n't want to have to quit facebook , but should i ? what do you think ? do you avoid facebook for any reason ? how does it make you feel after spending time on it ? can you go on the internet without checking facebook ? if so , how do you do it ? challenge of the day write down how you feel after spending time on facebook then give it up for a day at the end of that day , write down how you feel is there a huge difference ?