did you know there is a hierarchy in the twisted world of eating disorders ? binge eating disorder is a legitimate type of eating disorder however , the people who have it rarely ask for or receive proper recovery treatment most people who don t struggle with it don t understand how painful it is and those who do have it don t feel like they deserve official eating disorder help in the twisted world of eating disorders , anorexia nervosa is considered the highest and most d coveted level of eating disorders bulimia nervosa is second place , leaving binge eating disorder somewhere among the peasants i was never as successful at my eating disorder as some people at least , that s what i felt like i never thought i was bad enough to deserve to get help i guess i was classified as having ed nos eating disorder not otherwise specified because i oscillated between all three so i definitely didn t feel like i was allowed to ask for help even today , after learning all the facts and realizing that all eating disorders are equally dangerous , i still find myself questioning whether or not i really deserved any help even now , when i am at my lowest moments , i feel like the e d still has power over me and still has to run its course part of me wants to revert back to my old e d ways so that i can prove to myself and other people that i really did have an eating disorder it is so difficult for me to stand next to someone really thin even if i know they also struggle with an eating disorder , i can t help but feel inferior i feel like i am an eating disorder failure they are obviously better at their eating disorder than me maybe i should take it up again and prove to myself that i am good at it too i know , twisted the past few months , i have had really normal eating habits however , i am still afraid that this is all a show , that i m just pretending , and that it will come back i think a part of my fear is coming from the fear of losing my e d for good don t get me wrong , that s the goal ! however , i feel like i am being tempted to revert back to some of my old ways so that i don t lose my skills completely i am tempted to give in to little things i 've been cutting back my calories here and there i 've been exercising a little more than i want to and i 've been trying to cut out complete food groups , like grains and sugars i bet part of this internal struggle is because the enemy wants to have control over me through this eating disorder and he s scared to lose me to full recovery so , in a certain sense , i must be doing something right because i am being tempted if i wasn t close to letting go of it for good , then i probably wouldn t be tempted so bad if you could follow me up there , great ! if not , that s ok i feel like my brain just thinks differently than other people s brain or do you think this way too ? someone at a party you re so skinny how do you eat so much and stay so thin ? what i hear why are you still eating ? if you keep eating that much you won t be skinny anymore my thoughts i don t eat that much , do i ? and i m not skinny ! look at these thunder thighs ! someone at the dinner table you must be really hungry ! you re plate is full ! what i hear you re a pig ! save some for us my thoughts it s not that much food , is it ? it s a small plate it just looks full i ll just take one bite of each thing and throw the rest away at a restaurant when offered dessert i m full i can t eat another thing you want dessert ? you re still hungry ? what i hear you fat slob why are you still eating ? you should be on a diet because i am thinner than you my thoughts never mind forget the dessert forget eating anything from now on it stinks it s twisted it s so difficult to overcome how can i ever expect anyone else to understand this different world ? i know i get all fired up about eating disorders and having a poor relationship with food and such why am i that way ? i do n't know all i know is that it really bothers me , because i know what twisted lies it feeds , and because it s a huge part of my life e d triggers are everywhere food is the enemy in our country the other day , i had to leave the room when people start talking about diets and weight i can t go a single day without encountering a conversation about food and appearance i know i can t solve this food hate problem myself it s deeply ingrained in our culture it s going to take generations to fix but just because i can t beat em doesn t mean i am going to join em if you liked reading this article , check out these similar posts three out of four why i do n't like talking about my eating disorder do n't eat the birthday cake ! how to stop binge eating