sometimes , my husband is hesitant to get up in the morning , just like any other person when they don t get enough sleep when craig innocently complains about going to work , my crazy brain starts to panic and a train of thought starts rolling down hill i know he likes his job and i know he would never just quit however , once the door is opened , my thoughts just run wild i end up with an anxiety attack because i think that he won t be able to go to work anymore because he is having one bad day , all the rest of the days will be bad from here on out he won t be able to keep his job , he won t be able to take care of me , and i will have to get a job i will have to make money to share the burden and support the family ! typical string of consciousness worst case scenarios start like this craig hits the snooze button multiple times , and before he is out the door , i am hyperventilating because i think i have to get a full time job i am job searching online and beefing up my resume until he sends me a happy text you mean you re not going to quit your job ? you mean it s not the end of the world ? oh okay moving on now , i don t want craig to never complain to me nobody should live with that expectation i love my husband dearly and i want him to complain to me about things that are going on instead of hyperventilating at a normal comment , i need to figure out what i can do to be more realistic what i need to do in the future , is stop the train of thought before it derails how can this be done , you ask ? oh , you did n't ask ? well , i 'll tell you anyway first , i need to tell god i put the situation in his hands god will take care of us no matter what i put my trust in him second , i entertain those worst case scenario thoughts for a moment not what you expected me to say , eh ? okay , i am going to play out the scenario in my head so craig quits his job today that would be the worst case for me after that , he would probably want to find a new job and even if he did n't , we have an emergency fund in savings we could survive for some time with that amount if he couldn t get a job , i couldn t keep a job , and no one would take us in , even a close family member , then we would starve to death as long as we kept going to confession , we would go to heaven awesome ! well , that worst case scenario had a very happy ending sometimes , it helps me to think through the worst case scenarios that pop in my head maybe they are not as bad as i thought in the first place maybe they are ? well , what i really need to do is to just take it one day at a time if i can t move on from the snowballing thoughts , i will end up calling craig he usually sets me straight and calms my anxieties it is helpful to talk to someone with a clear head when yours is cloudy well , what do you think ? are there times when you blow things out of proportion in your head ? if so , how do you stop those negative thoughts and get back on the reality path ? maybe , you experience this with your kids are you worried that they will never come home when you put them on the bus ? do they disobey you one time and you already see them standing in juvenile court ? i wrote a post a while ago about a similar thing if you missed it , click here ! have a nourishing weekend !