welcome to the second week of nonfiction november ! this week 's topic is what are you looking for when you pick up a nonfiction book ? do you have a particular topic you re attracted to ? do you have a particular writing style that works best ? when you look at a nonfiction book , does the title or cover influence you ? if so , share a title or cover which you find striking i try very hard to get a variety of non fiction in my reading some years i succeed and some years i do n't last year i think i did a pretty good job until last week , i thought the topics that interested me the most are science and medicine with an emphasis on empirical rather than personal however , while i was answering last week 's question i realized something those preferences have changed two of my top three favorite books are memoirs ! and all three of them were about social awareness of course i already knew that social awareness was an important topic to me , but i had n't realized how much it had affected my reading choices in the past , i have preferred books that are researched so well they almost read like a textbook and i still have a leaning towards the empirical rather than the personal , though memoirs on certain subjects mental illness , for instance are more and more appealing to me i read so many empirical books about mental illness that i'm afraid i'm losing the people that are affected by the illnesses same for social justice issues i can read textbook information all i want , but if i do n't read memoirs , then i 'll never know how people feel about these things only what they think about them and yes , the cover and title are a huge influence over me ever hear the phrase do n't judge a book by it 's cover ? of course you have and i do i think the cover and title should be chosen carefully to indicate what sort of book is inside it is the publisher 's first line of attack in getting someone to pick up the book and read the blurb in the first place one book that i picked up mainly because of the cover and title was severed , by frances larson what about you ? what are you looking for in your nonfiction ? comment below or include a link to your post in the linky lory emerald city book review katherine writerly reader sharlene real life reading heather based on a true story ellie curiosity killed the bookworm kailana the written world julie julz reads debbie rodgers exurbanis amanda gun in act one amanda a bookshelf monstrosity katie doing dewey raidergirl an adventure in reading steph b b toady eva the paperback princess louise lone star on a lark nick one catholic life jo ann lakeside musing jenny reading the end stacey unruly reader sarah 's book shelves deb nance at readerbuzz risa the next chapter juliana ablankgarden aphra behn , by vita sackville west you 're next ! mister linky 's magical widgets if you are participating in nonfiction november , fill in the form below and press enter your name your url please leave a comment after linking thank you ! click here for mister linky 's name url cookie removal tool