ipod , i cannot truly express my gratitude for your tireless efforts at keeping me entertained when we go to the gym together , you patiently sit in front of me and play music for me while i work out you don t seem to mind that i sweat on you , or that i sometimes fling you violently to the ground when my thumb inadvertently catches your headphones cord you just keep on playing music for me sometimes i get tired of the songs i have given you to play for me and i keep pushing the fast forward button , but you never get upset with me for doing this you just keep cheerfully suggesting more songs ipod how about this one ? me skips song after hearing first two notes ipod no ? okay , do you like this one ? me skips song because it has applause in the beginning and that means that it is a live song and wo n't really get going any time in the next minutes ipod not today , huh ? here , try this one , it is one of your favorites ! me remembers that the song used to be a favorite before i listened to it times in a row and ruined it for myself ipod starting to panic no again ? how about some journey ? me listens to 'midnight train' all the way through , impatiently waiting for the 'do n't stop believing' part because that part is really the only reason i listen to the song ipod okay , you like 'midnight train' do you want to hear it again ? me does not want to hear 'midnight train' again because i held down the rewind button and re listened to the best part about times in a row , and now it , too , has lost all meaning for me ipod confused not in the mood for midnight train' anymore ? me confirms the negatory by pushing fast forward ipod i know that you did n't want to hear 'midnight train' again a few seconds ago , but how about now ? me presses fast forward button ipod how about now ? me fast forward button ipod no really , how about now ? me ing fast forward and i hope i never hear it again ! ! ! ! ! ipod okay , i ll wait for you to skip over a few more songs and then try playing 'midnight train' again because i know how much you like it thank you for alway trying your hardest , ipod i know i get frustrated with your misdirected and totally arbitrary enthusiasm for certain songs , but please don t feel bad it is not your fault i should have given you more to work with also , don t take it so hard when i forget to charge your battery again , it is not your fault it is seriously heartbreaking when you make those little sputtering chirps as you are dying i can tell you are trying as hard as you can to keep playing my music even though your lifeblood is slowly draining away it s okay i ll plug you in when we get home