i have decided to re post what i wrote last night but with sober commentary there are definitely some things that need clarification i will attempt to explain the thinking behind what i said last night , but i can only guess in some places like i have no idea why i wanted to go to the bike path that badly and i no longer understand the point of twitter or why i said that i did in the first place i know that i felt like i reached some profound understanding last night , but i have absolutely no recollection of what that was anyway , this is why i do n't drink very often carry on this is sober me this is drunk me okay you guys i am going to do my first real drunk blog on a sunday night because i do n't have a job so i can do stuff like this and it does n't matter that paragraph was n't so bad i got my point across clearly and succinctly what 's next ? i kind of planned something like this as a publicity stunt earlier , but i never did it because i am a coward but today boyfriend impulse bought a bottle of wine at safeway and he had n't made pasta yet and i guess i kind of got tricked into drunk blogging i got tricked into drunk blogging ? i do n't remember what i was thinking there , but i am pretty sure no one tricked me i think it was more like boyfriend bought some wine because we were going to make pasta with shrimp because buying shrimp is always a smart thing to do when you are poor and he wanted to use the wine in the dressing then i was like i know what would be a good idea ! let 's get drunk ! and then we each had a glass of wine and by each had a glass of wine i mean i had a ounce coffee mug of wine and i do n't know what boyfriend did because i was too busy drinking and tweeting and i got really drunk and boyfriend did n't because he is responsible and has a normal bmi and he did n't get so excited about getting drunk that he forgot to eat dinner until pm i am already one coffee mug full of wine into this thing , but i drank it really fast because i hate alcohol but i still want to be drunk like a normal person are normal people drunk ? what did i mean when i said that ? i think i was probably referring to the fact that most people my age drink all the time and they are just fine with it , so i should be too i feel like i am doing really well with being coherent so far i guess we 'll see if i feel that way in the morning it is now the morning and i do n't feel like i was being coherent even at this early stage so anyway , i 'll keep updating this as the night wears on maybe it will be interesting but i ca n't exactly guarantee that yeah , not that interesting maybe i should get some friends i will try to respond to comments as you guys make them did n't do that oh ! and i will be tweeting because i hear that tweeting while drunk is like an out of body experience like maybe i 'll finally understand what twitter is for or some shit if you have n't looked at my tweets from last night , you should probably do that i think i am much better at drunk tweeting than drunk blogging probably because the character limit on twitter makes it difficult to ramble i am prone to rambling as it is , then you add alcohol and i pretty much transform into f scott fitzgerald if you got that reference , good for you and i'm sorry your english teacher made you read that book okay i'm getting bad at typing so i am going to go drink more logically and then we 'll do this again who is we ? i am the one typing i guess maybe i have multiple personalities while drunk i can clearly see that i was referring to you guys and me when i said we and i think i knew that when i first typed we but then i forgot that that was what i was talking about seconds later and i became confused by myself and started questioning my psychological integrity i am probably going to say something super offensive i just have a bad feeling about all of this but i'm doing it anyway because i'm drunk and i ca n't stop blogging because i'm a blogalcoholic that did n't make sense but it kind of did i do n't think i said anything offensive or very interesting for that matter i talked about bears a lot and the bike path because , for some reason , i had a total boner for the bike path last night well , i'm not actually an alchoholic since i do n't really drink alcohol i am more of a seasonal binge drinker i go months without drinking and then bam ! i randomly decide to get drunk because i am impulsive have we covered that already ? probably yes yes we did cover it lot of times and i am glad that i clarified on the alcoholic thing if i did n't , you guys might have thought that getting drunk all by myself on sunday night was a regular thing in my life it 's not i'm just impulsive okay i am going to hit post now should i update this entry or make new posts for all of my subsequent which is a big word for a drunk person posts ? is that redundant ? shit okay bye i like how i am writing like i'm talking on the phone like i need to alert you guys that i may stop writing soon it 's not like you were watching me type i could have just ended after probably and everyone would have accepted that as the end because there were no more words after it update i forgot to put that in there last night so i just left a comment on mr asshol douch face 's blog remember the guy we were all going to insult because he insulted me ? the insult mr asshol douch face is n't really as hardcore as i thought it was last night especially since half of the words are missing an e i 've been insulted by drunk people before and i always kind of looked down on them , like i would never be dumb enough to get drunk and start yelling at people in a less than cogent fashion does it still count when you do it on the internet ? i almost think it 's worse when you type out something like mr asshol douch face because if you are just saying it aloud to someone , the possibility exists that it will still sound phonetically similar to what you are intending to say and perhaps you 'll be granted a bit more leniency by your audience since there is no backspace button for speaking with typing , there are no excuses and phonetics do n't matter this is the comment i left him i am going to edit this part parenthetically because there are n't any paragraphs i am drunk and you are a douche bag so there 's that i opened with a zinger booyah seriously though , if i was a mean person , i would probably call you a queef faced man child with stupid disease that was almost as good as mr asshol douch face i guess i just kind of did yes i did and i do n't know why i would have hesitated because that is not a very hurtful insult and guess what ? no , serioulsy guess what ? douche bag ! ! ! ! ! yes , i think i already called him that twice in fact , it probably would n't have been very hard at all to guess that that was what i was going to say so much for the element of surprise ahahhahaajjajajja am i mexican ? why am i laughing with j 's ? more importantly , why am i even laughing ? it 's like i think i invented the term douche bag or something i am so glad i am drunk and that we 're friends since when am i friends with this guy ? kind of oh i see what i was trying to do i think i was trying to be mean when i said kind of like i thought i had tricked him into thinking we were friends and he would be surprised when i sarcastically informed him that we were not actually friends ouch that must have really hurt him you should really do something better with your life though now i'm all serious and advice y ? you are n't a good person that was harsh i will be really surprised if this guy has n't killed himself yet what if someone stopped blogging because of your insults ? that 's actually a valid point good job me would that be funny ? no absolutely not kind of , what ? ? but it is also immoral you fucking douch y ass bandit there i go with the douche thing again i guess that 's my go to insult when i'm drunk and i think when i said kind of in response to when i asked would that be funny i was trying to get all tactical and make him think that i agreed with him so he would be more likely to listen to me and then he 'd be more vulnerable to my verbal onslaught i bet you looked at my blog and you were all i could never compete with that becasue you totally could n't yeah , me , i bet that is exactly why he insulted me good catch i could out blog you while drunk i'm really spitting fire now watch out , guy whatever that means oh , look at that ! it 's almost like i actually knew i was being an idiot but then just said ah fuck it i'm drunk and it does n't matter if you want to find out , you should probably challenge me to a blog off now because i am drunk and i would totally own your ass i am so glad he did not challenge me to anything i do n't think i was capable of owning asses at that point can i be frank ? oh please , can i ? you are a douche bad fail i do n't know if i told you that already , but i should have oh , i told him already in fact , you 'd think i was writing a pay per post promoting the term douche bag except i got drunk and messed up that last one and ended up promoting douche bad which is probably a rival company and i am going to get fired in this imaginary pay per post fantasy of mine am i still drunk ? dude that is not a complete sentence by any stretch of the imagination and should not be ended by a period you told me i was lame and even though i am , i am also not lame at all i am sure he understood what i meant i have a fucking trophy in my living room no i do n't for all of my accomlishments oh yes my accomlishments there are so many of them ! it says allie best fucking person ever ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! it does n't and it totally has all of those exclamation points too it definitely does n't because guess what ? it does n't even fucking exist in reality have you ever thought about life ? i was going to say something profound here , but i forgot what i was going to say and so i just said this probably not because you are a douche bag i think that was the point at which i gave up on making a convincing argument and just settled for repetition later , tater because that is something that normal people say allie yup it was definitely me who said all that i think i won , but i'm not sure well , technically i could n't have won because i was never in a competition in the first place details update i am just ate dinner i was trying to hit backspace and just ending up hitting instead i had pasta it had shrimp in it and boyfriend was video taping me and he tried to make me feel bad about eating the shrimp because he knows that i personify inamninate objects and that is just not fair he said do n't leave that shrimp in there it died for you ! and then i had to eat the rest of the shrimp because i felt bad it might be a funny video but i honestly do n't know if anyone else in the world would understand does anyone else feel bad for leaving a shrimp or two behind ? like maybe they died for nothing because you are n't eating them ? i feel lke a big jerk okay , so boyfriend never actually tried to make me feel bad for not eating a shrimp he tried to make me feel bad for not eating a tomato but that is not the same thing as a shrimp and you would think i could have recognized that , but no anyway , i asked boyfriend if he wanted to go on an adventure and he was like it depend on where you wan to go adventuring , and i said on the bike path ! i like how the text suddenly gets all huge also , i have no idea what my fixation with the bike path was , but for some reason i thought that there would be something really cool there or something there was n't but i did almost break my leg when i ran away from boyfriend and fell into a ditch so maybe that is where we are going to go who knows ? ! we could go anywhere not really we could go to the river or the bike path or maybe taco bell but anywhere ? not buying it too poor wow that last sentence had a double meaning ! update so i did n't update as much as i thought i would i was too busy advernturing and then boyfriend bought ice cream and that distracted me and so did twitter advernturing good one and guess what ? oh , i could n't possibly i get twitter now it is like a conference call only with typing instead of talking but if it was talking , each person would only be allowed to talk for seconds before being cut off it keeps everything even and it forces you to be very efficient like , a lot of times i write out it is when all i need to do is it 's i knew that before , but twitter really drilled it home and does it seem like shortening it is to it 's should save way more than one measly character ? it does to me we should set things on fire to protest that did n't make any sense why would anyone want to be on a conference call where they get cut off after seconds ? that would definitely get in the way of productivity and would not be a good idea at all or not i'm glad i clarified that i did n't actually want you guys to set things on fire in real life or maybe i was trying to convey that you had the option of not setting things on fire i'm sure you would have been so confused if i had n't told you i should probably go to bed now boyfriend is sitting next to me on the couch and sighing loudly and hinting about how he has to get up in the morning to go to his job like a real person i told him that i need to stay up at least long enough to drink orange juice , but i just looked up and he is already in the other room brushing his teeth so i do n't think he heard me jerk a real person ? am i pinnochio ? anyway , thanks for being awesome and thanks for helping me beat down douche face crap blog guy yes thank you and thank you for supporting me when i called him douche bad that must have been difficult , but i know you guys had my back and guess what i just realized ? that dude ? the one we were just talking about ? he writes insults on practically every place on the whole internet and most of the people he insults go look at his blog to see who the hell he thinks he is and they probably look at his comments to see how others are reacting so as to gauge their responses accordingly and guess what that means ? all of us just got some major exposure by commenting on his blog and for that , we win i like how i did n't realize this until i was hammered and then i was like oh yeah ! good marketing move sober me ! you 're welcome i really do end up accidentally making good blogging decisions and then i make some bad ones too like drinking half of a bottle of hold on ravenwood wine from safeway that may not have been such a good blogging decision that would be raven 's wood i do n't know how i got that wrong because the word raven 's is separated from the word wood by almost four whole inches on the label there should have been no confusion whatsoever as to whether those words should be combined anyway , i am rambling really ? ? ? and that means bedtime also , boyfriend came back from brushing his teeth and he is standing in the doorway glaring at me like i am the worst girlfriend ever for getting drunk and ruining his real person who goes to bed before am routine psh sorry jesus i think i was really was pissed off at boyfriend for going to bed how dare he ruin my little party ? ! and just because he had to get up to go do cancer research in the morning ? ? unbelievable this is a picture of me from last night after you get beyond the fact that i am unbelievably hot , you may find yourself wondering about that scab on my chin that is from when i tried to get rid of a zit by putting toothpaste on it it 's supposed to work look it up if you do n't believe me i think i put on waaaaaay too much toothpaste i put a band aid on it and left it overnight and in the morning ? no more zit , but i had melted my face off if i end up posting videos from last night , you will see that i am quite fixated on this scab i keep asking boyfriend can you see my scab ? and do i still look hot even though i have a scab on my face ? at one point , i even ordered boyfriend to film me on my good side so no one could see my scab