the keywords people use to find your blog or website on google are very important to your success on the internet according to statcounter i think i'm doing it wrong or maybe i'm doing it exactly right because i 've most definitely cornered the niche on ways to abort your gay married , al qaeda loving baby for or less ! good career move , me update i emailed boyfriend at work and i was like if someone asked you the question 'uterus babies not sticking to ? ' how would you respond ? boyfriend that 's not really a question more like a statement or just a string of random words me but if it was a question , how would you answer it ? boyfriend well , first i would want to get more information are you talking about a fetus or embryo inside a uterus or an actual baby uterus ? or a baby 's uterus ? me what if it 's just a giant uterus that people had to throw babies at and if the babies stick , they win the game or something ? boyfriend i do n't think that 's what they meant me i'm just trying to be prepared , duncan i'm supposed to be an expert on stuff like this and i want to have all my bases covered if that question comes up boyfriend so they 're trying to figure out how to make the babies more sticky ? me i was approaching it from the angle of making the uterus more sticky , but making the babies more sticky would also work how do you propose we make the babies stickier ? boyfriend how long do they need to be stuck to the giant uterus ? me about seconds boyfriend wow that is really specific me the rules of baby uterus wall ball are extremely rigid boyfriend you need a job me this is my job and you are negatively affecting my career by not cooperating with me on this boyfriend i need to get back to work , allie me so do i ! boyfriend okay , what about wrapping the babies in velcro ? me that could totally work then boyfriend reminded me that google tracks all of his emails because he works in a government lab so i sent him an email that said furry penis , redrum , sphaeterg ten ! and boyfriend was like wtf ? and i said i'm trying to throw google off your trail and boyfriend was all i do n't think it works like that i honestly do n't know how he has n't been kidnapped by the government yet