what is the deal with rick moranis ? he 's so rick moranis y that will make a lot more sense later maybe in the course of holiday socializing , the conversation often turns to life and what , in particular , you are doing with yours when this happens , i usually try to look like i ca n't be bothered to contribute because i'm listening so hard my gaze burns into the side of boyfriend 's head and i nod and squint my eyes like i was previously unaware of his occupation oh my god ! that 's where you go every day ? i thought you were out giving blow jobs to support your crack habit what a relief ! i start to panic because i know i'm next after boyfriend has informed everyone that he is working on curing cancer , using phrases like retrovirus vector and endogenous , someone will turn to me and say so allie , what are you doing for work these days ? me me ? oh uh i'm blogging ? i usually say it like i'm asking a question , like i am completely unsure of whether or not it is true blogging ? maybe it depends on how you feel about the subject i do know that there are n't any retrovirus vectors involved friend what ? me i write a blog ? on the internet ? friend oh what is it called ? in this moment , i frantically try to determine whether the people around me are the type to be easily offended by the word fuck i try to think of some way i could test it like maybe i could say it 's fucking called hyperbole and a half , motherfucker ! ! but that might come off as rude i could lie i could tell them that i write a blog called the awesome charity for cancer and aids and diabetes and ebola and other deadly things that need awareness too blog , but they 'd find me out sooner or later and then i would never be able to see them again without having some long , awkward discussion about how they tried to check out my website but , for some reason , google did n't show any results for the awesome charity for cancer and aids and diabetes and ebola and other deadly things that need awareness too blog at that point , i 'd pretty much have to bank on the fact that maybe they do n't understand the internet and make up something about google boycotting aids awareness no i have to tell the truth me hypermehehshs nnd a hsss i try to say it really fast out of the corner of my mouth friend what ? me hyperbole and a smfl friend hyperbole and a what ? me and a half ? friend oh ! what 's it about ? me humor ? friend like what kind of humor ? this part kind of feels like when you 're in the doctor 's office because your whole body hurts and you are pretty sure that you have ebola , but you do n't want to offend the doctor by diagnosing yourself , so you just say i'm in pain and the doctor says describe the pain and you say it 's pain y and the doctor says okay but where ? and you say everywhere and the doctor says on a scale of to , how bad is the pain ? and you say eight ? because you have no idea where the scale starts or ends , but you 've never given birth , so you 're pretty sure it is n't a , and maybe that one time you shut your fingers in the door was a nine and the time you got kicked in the arm by a horse was a seven , and eights sound reasonable , so you just blurt it out but with a question mark in case you 're wrong then the doctor says is it a throbbing pain or a stabbing pain ? and you want to shout it feels exactly like an ebola pain and we can't waste any more time discussing it because i'm going to bleed out and turn into a zombie in like , five seconds ! ! ! ! then the doctor says ebola does n't turn you into a zombie and you say what the hell kind of medical school did you go to ? ? they did n't even prepare you for a zombie massacre ? ? but instead of trying to lead a doctor to the conclusion that i have ebola , i'm trying to lead my friends to the conclusion that i am funny only i ca n't just tell them that i am stabbing funny and on a scale of one to , it 's a seven because that does n't make sense i usually end up saying something like observational humor and my friend says like seinfeld ? and then the conversation derails and suddenly we 're talking about how i should start every post by saying what is the deal with ? ? and i did n't even get to convince them that i'm funny and they are going to visit my blog expecting seinfeld , but they are n't going to get seinfeld they are going to get clown aids and wolverine and rick moranis so i 've decided that i need to come up with a good description something that says i'm funny , but that 's just what other people think and i would never say that about myself because i'm modest and if you are terribly offended by jesus jokes and the word 'fuck , ' you may be disappointed with me , but can we still be friends ? it needs to sound as cool as retrovirus vector , but not quite as serious like if you were to put a little hat on it and make it dance around to ragtime something that lets people know that i am not really at all like seinfeld , but i appreciate his comedy and i hope to one day be famous like him which will definitely happen so they should watch their backs because pretty soon i 'll be rich enough to hire my own mafia and then i wo n't need to explain my blog