i woke up late yesterday that meant that i had to do my mile run during the hottest part of the day raw stupidity coupled with an unrelenting devotion to my olympic pipe dream got me out the door yesterday also happened to be the day i discovered that my city 's parks and recreation department does not believe in water fountains as a consequence , i found myself desperately thirsty and far away from home when the oh my god i am so thirsty i could just lie down and die stage of thirst hit me , i was still several miles from anything resembling a populated area just when i thought i was going to actually die , i came upon the most beautiful thing i have ever seen in my life a sprinkler if only i had known what a fickle stroke of luck this was i am not psychic , so this particular sprinkler seemed perfect close to the road , far from the house and partially obscured from view by an immaculately groomed hedge i stopped and nonchalantly walked toward my target i was pleased to see that the hose was not attached to the sprinkler head far easier to drink from i would n't have to chase it around the yard , biting at it like a dog ! if you have ever tried to drink from a moving sprinkler , or have seen a dog try to drink from a moving sprinkler , you will surely understand my jubilation at not having to do so my high spirits were soon tempered by the realization that turning on this particular hose was no small task there were an unimaginable number of switches , levers and wires attached to the inconspicuous black box from which the hose emanated if that was n't enough , the entire apparatus needed to be plugged in to an electrical box that was in clear view of the house i almost gave up almost at that point , i had invested too much to quit i fiddled nervously with wires and switches , like a criminal hot wiring a car when i thought that i had the right combination , i made a dash for the electrical box once i plugged the system in , it was pretty easy i flipped one last switch and a stream of cold , clear liquid came gushing out of the hose onto the ground , obliterating a tastefully arranged patch of tiny blue flowers retrospectively , i can see that there were more than enough clues at that point to figure out what was about to happen to me , but we all know that thirst is inversely proportional to logic only after my hydration status had returned to normal could i see the error of my judgement i stuck the end of the hose directly into my mouth and began choking down water as quickly as i could it was already too late when my brain registered an incongruity between the way that water is supposed to taste and the taste of the substance i was currently ingesting the only way to describe it is suave 'ocean breeze' shampoo mixed with tree sap at that point i realized that the property owners were the kind of people who put pesticides in their lawn irrigation system with nary a thought of the health and well being of parched runners bastards i stood there for a moment , the hose dangling limply in my hand what had i done ? this is a tricky situation to find yourself in at first i thought it would be a good idea to get help , but how would i explain the events leading up to my present situation ? i imagined myself knocking on the property owner 's door me um hi i just drank about a pint of 'water' from your fancy little irrigation system there would you mind driving me to the emergency room to get my stomach pumped ? yes ? well , could you at least tell me the name of the chemicals that are going to kill me ? the explanation for my plight was prohibitively embarrassing since embarrassment is also inversely proportional to logic , i decided to just run home the last miles of my run were a blur of shame , panic and pesticide burps when i finally reached my apartment , i crawled up my steps , not unlike the scary child from the ring , and oozed slowly through my front door boyfriend was alarmed what happened to you ? ? he gasped i 'll tell you later , i moaned just get me the number for poison control boyfriend was visibly distressed at this request , but when someone who looks like a character from a horror flick asks you to do something , you do n't ask questions like , the poison control hotline is reserved only for people in the midst of an emergency this being the case , i had always thought that calling poison control would be exciting like being part of a special club i think most people feel this way deep down well , if you ever wondered , calling poison control is not nearly as fun as you 'd think it would be following is my best recollection of the phone conversation between myself and poison control poison control you have reached the poison control hotline for montana , colorado and idaho , this is roberta speaking what seems to be the problem ? me i think i may have ingested a large amount of pesticides roberta what kind of pesticides ? me i do n't know roberta you do n't know ? do you have the container that the pesticides were in ? me they were in a sprinkler roberta a sprinkler ? me yeah i was running roberta you were running from what ? me no , i was running , like on a run um exercising ? roberta you were exercising ? me yes , and it was really hot and i stopped to get a drink from someone 's sprinkler roberta silence me it tasted like ocean breeze shampoo mixed with tree sap roberta i do n't really know any chemicals that fit that profile , ma'am how much did you drink ? me uh probably about a pint ? i was really thirsty roberta after another prolonged silence how do you feel now ? me stupid roberta do you feel lightheaded or nauseated ? me oh uh kind of roberta are you hallucinating ? me i do n't know are you real ? roberta yes , i'm real me how do i know you are n't just saying that ? roberta annoyed ma'am , are you hallucinating or not ? me um i figured i had about a chance of getting it right no ? roberta well , since i do n't know what chemical you may have ingested , the best i can do for you is tell you to sip some water , lie down and wait to see what happens me on the verge of tears am i going to die ? roberta no ma'am , i do n't think you are going to die you might throw up , though me okay roberta call back if you have any more questions or if you start to feel feverish or hallucinate i had a lot more questions , but i doubted that roberta , the possibly imaginary receptionist from poison control could or wanted to answer them i hung up the phone and sat down on the kitchen floor boyfriend peeked his head around the corner is everything alright ? he asked well , that depends , i replied are you real ?