i win things every day does that mean i'm awesome ? probably but it also means that i am really good at coming up with totally arbitrary challenges for myself to win that 's right i make up contests in my head just so that i can win them and feel good about myself for example if i guess what time it is and i am even reasonably close to the actual time i win if i am pumping gas and i get the price to equal x amount of dollars and zero cents i win even if i have to pump some gas on the ground to do it if i can hold my breath for a whole minute i win if i meet someone and i try to guess their name before they tell me what it is and it turns out that their name starts with the same letter as the name i guessed i win then , if i space out because i am thinking about how much i won and i suddenly realize that i have no idea what the other person is talking about and that they just finished a sentence and their voice kind of went up at the end which means that they asked me a question and now they expect me to answer and i say yes because i figure that is a pretty common answer and the person does n't notice that i was n't listening because yes was the answer they were looking for i win if i can find a matching pair of socks i win i win double if i can do it in under a minute if i am on a date with boyfriend and i finish my hamburger before he finishes his i win if i am reading a pottery barn catalog and i find the most expensive item i win along those same lines if i am in the grocery store and i happen upon the wine aisle and i find the most expensive wine i win i win again if i can find the cheapest wine if i can find a wine for under , i get drunk and then i win again if i am eating potato chips and i find a chip that is folded over on itself i win if i find two folded chips in a row , i win and i also get good luck for nine whole years if i look at a clock and it happens to be exactly something o'clock and zero seconds i win if i type twenty words in a row without hitting backspace i win if i pick up a deck of cards and yell clubs ! and then draw a card and it is n't a club i do n't win , but i will yell clubs ! again and keep picking cards until i pick the right suit and then i win if i am walking on a sidewalk and i manage not to step on even a single crack i win and my mother 's back remains unbroken , so she wins too and when my mom wins , i win , so that means i win double ! heyyyo ! if i buy something and it costs an even dollar amount i win even if i do n't actually have that dollar amount you should definitely get store credit for checking out with an even dollar amount if i close my eyes and throw a wadded up piece of paper at boyfriend and i hit him i win if i hit him in the face , i win double if he gets all pissed off and says stop it , i win because i guessed he was going to say that ahead of time and i was right if i wake up in the morning and i really have to pee and when i pee , i pee for longer than i have ever peed before at least on record i win i may be the only person in the world who keeps records of how long they can pee , but look at it this way you do n't get to win as much as me , do you ? i bet that puts it in perspective if i spell fahrenheit correctly without needing to use spellcheck i win if i spill cereal on the floor and i guess a number that is even somewhat close to the actual number of cereal pieces on my floor i win and i do n't have to pick up the cereal because i won duh you 'd think that this would be a simple concept to grasp , but boyfriend struggles with it he asks wait you won what ? and i say i guessed the right number of cereals on the floor ! and he says and that means that you do n't have to pick them up ? and i say exactly ! and then he starts lecturing me about the real world and blah , blah , blah even today , i went for a run with boyfriend , and i ended up winning we ran on a long , straight stretch of road before turning off onto a different road just before we turned off on the other road , i heard a car coming up behind us and i realized that it was the first car we 'd seen on that particular stretch of road i immediately thought i ca n't let it pass me because if i make it to the end of this road without getting passed by a single car , i win ! i started sprinting so that i could beat the car to the end of the road boyfriend looked at me weird and then the driver of the car looked at me strangely too , but none of that mattered because i won ! this all may seem silly until you consider that i get to be a champion on a daily sometime hourly basis in fact , i probably won more stuff than anyone else today , so i win again ! winning is easy when you put your mind to it ! sometimes i think i should become an inspirational speaker and try to enrich the lives of others with my winning ways and then i realize that if everyone else was winning as much as me , i may be in jeopardy of losing at winning the most then i give up on helping people and simply devote the rest of my life to winning as many pointless contests as possible until i realize that i can actually win at losing the most , at which point i will cease to be even the least bit productive because i will finally have an excuse for being lazy banana guess what that was ? if you guessed a contest in which i challenged myself to integrate the word banana into the end of a blog post , you are right ! you win ! and i win because i said banana p s i also win because i wrote two posts in a row with titles written in caps and i did n't even know it p p s it is exactly so i win again p p p s i win for writing a post post post script edit i was just informed that my behavior may actually be a sign of uncontrolled ocd does that mean i lose ?