hi i am not coping well with this bit of success i seem to have come across it appears that my nervous system is having trouble distinguishing celebratory excitement from extreme danger as you can imagine , this has not helped to foster an atmosphere of tranquil creativity every time i sit down to try to write or draw something , i feel like chaos and darkness are going to erupt out of me like some sort of natural disaster laced with pcp and everything i love is going to die much of this terror may stem from previous experiences with feelings of success the same thing happened when i decided that i wanted to be a psychologist and then a journalist and then a doctor again i want this time to be different i want things to work out i'm utterly terrified of waking up one morning to find some guy standing over my bed with a flashing neon sign that reads haha no one actually likes you ! ! ! it was all a joke and you fell for it ! ! ! you idiot ! so i 've been keeping all my excitement bottled up inside even though i desperately want to tell anyone who will listen about how great my life is right now it 's partly because i'm superstitious and partly because i believe in at least maintaining the appearance of modesty the combination of feeling like i'm going to die and repressing my happy feelings for fear of looking like an idiot , has made it nearly impossible for me to get my ideas out in a coherent way i have a whole binder full of post ideas , but when i try to sit down and actually put them together , it just ends up looking like something created by a schizophrenic baboon with a bear fetish and an endless supply of finger paint like there 's some stupid little guy living in my head and all he wants to write about is bears anyway , i wanted to let you know what 's going on and why i have n't been posting as much it will get better this has happened before does anybody remember that week where all i posted was a string of rick moranis pictures ? and then that somehow turned into a failed side project called lolrickmoranis ? that was a shameful time however , it seemed to work itself out and everything went back to normal the next week let 's all hope that 's the case here if it is n't , i sincerely hope you enjoy reading about bears as much as i seem to enjoy writing about them update just to clarify , i still want to be famous and win the internet it 's just that it might take a few days of being a total recluse to get me back to the point where i can write draw funny things update you know what ? fuck it