remember how yesterday i was all i'm dying from drawing too much , how about you guys just interview me so i do n't have to come up with a post on my own ? i seriously underestimated your capacity to ask questions and i overestimated my ability to come up with good answers i really do n't think i'm cut out to be famous , you guys this shit 's hard anyway , i ended up picking the questions that led to the most entertaining informative answers if i did n't answer your question , it does n't mean that i hate you or that i hate your question it just means that i failed at creating a satisfactory answer alright , question time ! why do you live in montana ? are you being held against your will by a bear and a sad bee ? modg i live in montana because boyfriend and i went to school here and then after we graduated , boyfriend was like i know what would be a good idea ! i should get a job in montana and then we should keep living here ! and i was like okay so here i am some days i feel like i am being held here against my will by a bear , and some days i'm happy to live here given a choice of eating only ham or only raisins for the rest of your life , which would you choose and why ? mildly unstable i would probably choose raisins because they have fiber and fiber is healthy and also i could probably soak the raisins in water and then ferment them and make wine and then i could get drunk and forget about the fact that i 'll only be able to eat raisins for the rest of my life when choosing a cat , what do you think is important ? swistle when choosing a cat , i think it is important to check and make absolutely sure that the cat is not a robot destroyer if you can confirm that the cat is a genuine animal , then i would make sure that it does n't have rabies are you or are you not the first sign of the apocalypse ? what is the second sign ? what is the best way to repent ? sarah p maybe i think i might count as a false messiah in case anyone is wondering , i'm not jesus bam apocalypse averted you 're welcome what made you choose the lowly nadle to raise to such animated heights ? zaedah it just kind of happened it was the product of too little sleep and too much sugar does boyfriend ever see the same face you have in your header ? how often ? is he turned on or skeered ? goinglikesixty boyfriend is much more likely to see my raptor face when i'm really stressed , i like to pretend i'm a dinosaur i do n't think it scares boyfriend anymore he 's used to it where do you think the word sandwich came from ? tony supposedly sandwiches are named after the earl of sandwich , but we all know that 's a lie i think it 's just a cover up for the fact that our ancestors ate sand have you ever noticed how all kids try to eat sand ? it 's their primal instincts kids have a vestigial appetite for sand what do you think of twilight ? tony i hear it has vampires in it what did you do this morning for hours instead of writing a blog post ? better austin today i woke up to my alarm and flailed around melodramatically before crawling out of bed and then i almost fell down the stairs then i made some tea and stared at my wall for a little while then i made myself an award for getting up so early then i tried to write a blog post , but it did n't work , so i just drew pictures instead if a spleen and a tomato juice were involved in a war between aliens , would the horse radish win a poodle ? christina in wonderland verbs how will you celebrate when not if you become champion of the internet ? the recreational premed when i become champion of the internet , i will obviously also become very wealthy , so i will buy myself a unicorn and ride it around town while screaming randomly is it exhausting being so awesome ? barbara yes it is , barbara the weight of my awesomeness is a heavy load to bear it 's like wearing a backpack full of rocks and trying to run uphill as fast as i can in the snow and inspirational music is playing in the background , but i ca n't hear it because my ears are too full of my own splendor in all seriousness , though , this is hard work blogging , i mean not being awesome that just kind of comes naturally even though i get to sit around in my pajamas all day , i'm working more than full time it 's fun work , but there 's a lot of it ! boyfriend says that i probably work hours a week between writing , editing , drawing , emailing and forum ing he was kind of pouty about it okay , so i just realized how much hours is it 's probably more like or i blame boyfriend for the melodramatic exaggeration if a celebrity would play you in a movie , who would it be ? barbara charlize theron or megan fox then everyone would think i was super hot what illustrators did you admire growing up ? buzz i was obsessed with calvin and hobbes when i was young also gary larson they are both able to convey complex ideas with fairly simple illustrations if bears and unicorns played each other in curling , who would win ? buzz bears the unicorns would be disqualified for using magic i'm pretty sure there 's a rule in curling that says you ca n't use magic in a fight between a grilled cheese sandwich and a taco , who would win ? boyd probably the taco have you ever been stabbed in the mouth by a hard taco shell ? tacos will shank you do you like to read ? if so , what ? shineforlife i love reading ! right now , i'm reading several david sedaris books my favorite book is probably the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy by douglas adams i also love books about drug addicts , for some reason is there a separation between regular allie and cartoon allie ? do they ever cross over ? untypically jia cartoon allie is based heavily on myself as a child that being said , there is significant overlap with my adult self but i think maybe cartoon me can open its mouth wider than i can if you could live anywhere you choose , where would it be ? the chicken 's consigliere narnia can you draw elephants ? i really like elephants joaaanna i can kind of draw elephants will spaghatta nadle ever find lave ? alyssa king oh , definitely