you know when you look back at your childhood and ask yourself how sure am i that i was n't retarded ? i'm pretty sure , right ? holy shit , was i retarded ? that happened to me today and i'm pretty sure that the answer is yes i found one of my journals from elementary school have you ever seen the movie a beautiful mind , where russel crowe is supposed to be some sort of genius and he writes all sorts of crazy conspiracy plans all over his walls but actually he 's just schizophrenic ? that 's pretty much exactly what my journal looks like , except the signs do n't point toward schizophrenia excusing the fact that i obviously was n't even trying to write on the lines , there are all of these confusing arrows and randomly capitalized words and places where i went back years later to edit in something monumentally important like i do n't need new pants anymore because i bought some cargo pants like i was going to be reading along and be suddenly stricken with confusion did i ever buy pants ? i do n't remember ! oh god ! how will i ever oh good , it looks like i bought some cargo pants what a relief one of my very first journal entries reads i wonder what my day is going to be like ? i hope i have a good day i 'll write more later then later i just wrote my hand got shut in the car door it hurt another entry reads i had so much fun at recess today ! we made a slide on a hill out of a cardboard box ! and then we played on it ! the rest of the page is filled with giant , scrawly writing that says boxes are so fun ! ! ! ! ! ! ! a week or so later i write i went to the orthodontist today to get my braces tightened mom had to run errands and she was late picking me up , so i took a nap behind a plant oh good a nap behind a plant in a busy dental complex waiting room how perfectly normal i'm sure my mom was overjoyed to explain that to everyone i can just imagine her shaking me awake and running out of the building , dragging me behind her , yelling do n't judge me ! apparently my favorite day ever i know this because there is a little box above it that says this is my favorite day went like this we had a sledding party up at pine hill and i bashed up my knee then we got pizza ! me , alison , sophie and shane sat at the same table and we made really long straws by sticking normal straws inside of each other ! then we saw patch adams ! this is followed by three entire pages of blink lyrics then this it starts out with really tiny handwriting that just says i saw some really awesome green spots today then the handwriting gets huge i had the most boring weekend ever ! ! monet stayed over and just sat there looking stupid she was at our house all weekend eating our food and watching our movies she brought her stupid dog , travis , and when i was lying on the couch , he jumped up there and started humping my legs and i couldn't make him stop because i was trapped under a blanket ! ! ! ! sunday was okay though i went to joey 's house and we jumped off of furniture onto pillows