the beginning of the week is hard for me after not writing on the weekend , i always feel like whatever i do next has to be legendary to make up for it but when i am trying to write something legendary , all i can think of is stuff like cake is awesome and one time i fell down and hurt myself eventually i just end up hiding in a corner and watching the bachelor for six hours straight because it helps me think but really it 's because i want to forget about my responsibilities that approach actually works pretty well until i start yelling at the contestants and boyfriend walks in and says oh , there you are ! what are you doing ? and i look up at him from my corner , my face and hands covered in honey because i just ate a honey and butter sandwich and i say leave me alone ! ! ! i'm watching my programs ! ! ! ! ! then boyfriend says what 's on your face ? and i'm like it's honey ! get out of your fucking tower and stop acting like you've never had honey on your face before ! ! ! and boyfriend is like what ? and i'm all don't judge me ! and i run away then it 's suddenly tuesday and i have n't accomplished anything aside from making myself really sticky and totally disillusioned with love at some point i'm like i just have to do it i'm going to sit down and write and see what comes out no pressure anyway , that 's how posts like this happen update i started responding to comments on this post and i realized that most of my responses were explaining butter and honey sandwiches , which is an admittedly weird thing to eat i decided to elaborate here instead i used to really enjoy peanut butter and honey sandwiches , but i can no longer eat peanut butter because boyfriend is deathly allergic to nuts we cannot have peanut butter in our house i still love bread and honey , though , so i got the bright idea to substitute regular butter for peanut butter it 's like all the best parts of every food ever , combined into one sandwich if you could put happiness on bread and eat it , that 's what eating a honey and butter sandwich would be like