i just found out that i'm pretty much an expert at making advertisements i saw an ad for taco bell and i was like that ad does n't make me want to buy tacos at all i could do way better than that and boyfriend was all tacos do n't really need advertisements they 're tacos they pretty much advertise themselves me yeah , but what if you are trying to break into the taco market and you have to compete with an established brand , like taco bell ? you 'd need to advertise and let consumers know that you are there and you are at least as competent at making tacos as taco bell boyfriend yeah me and that 's where i come in ! boyfriend that 's where you come in and do what ? me advertise the shit out of the new tacos ! boyfriend and how are you planning to do that ? me easy i 'll show you so then i drew this to demonstrate how i would advertise tacos if you are the owner of an up and coming taco business , i made this for you you 're welcome taco bell should 've thought of hiring me , but they did n't , so the advantage is all yours and my expertise is not limited to tacos ! example this is how i would sell pants if you are told that you are on fire and then you find out that it was just a joke and no , you are n't actually on fire , you 'll be so thankful to be alive that you 'll pretty much be willing to buy anything example this is how i would sell insurance this advertisement could work for almost anything , but i chose liberty mutual because it was the first thing i thought of which probably means they do n't need better advertising and i just realized that i should have used a bank as my example because then the catchphrase it makes a lot more sense than this picture would have the added benefit of being a pun example and this is how i would sell dog food people will remember an ad like that every dog food brand ever makes commercials of adorable puppies frolicking in grass or mischievously unrolling toilet paper all over the house i bet none of them have ever dared to tell you that they 'd turn your dog into a dragon just imagine , a couple is in the grocery store , trying to decide what kind of dog food to buy , and they 're like well , they 're all pretty much the same wait ! is that purina ? does n't that stuff turn your dog into a dragon ? awesome ! i'm buying that you jut got a new customer if you want people to buy your shit , i'm the person to call and if you contact me soon , you 'll probably be able to scam me into giving you a radical deal because i have been so busy discovering my talents that i have n't had time to do the proper research and i do n't have any idea how much to charge for my services if you contact me with an offer within the next hours , i 'll throw in a free piece of cake that 's right cake absolutely fucking free what are you waiting for ? email me at ickybana hotmail com i know it sounds unprofessional , but that 's the email address i 've had since i was and i'm not about to change it to accommodate my needs as an adult i have some hardcore loyalty to that email address just like the loyalty i'm going to try to build between you and your customers ! zing ! it 's like i was born to do this