last night , i dreamt that i had a pet unicorn and then boyfriend killed it when i woke up , i was still kind of mad boyfriend was like what 's wrong ? me i had a bad dream boyfriend i'm sorry what was it about ? me i had a pet unicorn boyfriend that does n't sound bad at all that actually sounds pretty awesome me no , but you killed it boyfriend i killed your unicorn ? me yeah boyfriend why would i do that ? me i do n't know you tell me boyfriend allie , i ca n't tell you because i did n't actually do anything me i'm confused boyfriend why ? me because what you are saying is logical , but i'm still totally pissed at you for killing my unicorn boyfriend but i did n't kill your unicorn unicorns do n't even exist me i know that it 's just it was n't even doing anything and you walked up to it and bashed its head in with a rock boyfriend that is actually kind of disturbing me i know ! that 's why i'm mad at you boyfriend wait you 're actually upset about this ? me of course i'm upset ! you murdered my pet unicorn ! boyfriend but remember how i did n't actually do that and it was just a dream ? me yeah , but i loved phineus boyfriend now it has a name ? me it always had a name ! did you think i was going to just not name my unicorn ? how would i get its attention ? boyfriend i do n't know clapping ? me that would never work what if we went to a concert or something he would be so confused ! boyfriend okay , what about you know what ? i'm not going to discuss this with you this is ridiculous me whistling might work it might learn to recognize my whistle boyfriend i'm going to go make lunch me but what am i supposed to do ? i'm still mad and i have no outlet boyfriend i do n't know draw a picture to express your feelings that usually seems to help me okay i showed the picture to boyfriend and he was n't very supportive he just said what the hell is wrong with you ? me i feel a lot better now , thanks for asking boyfriend is that a sword ? me yeah boyfriend i stabbed it with a sword and beat it with a rock ? me it 's an over dramatization boyfriend did it need over dramatizing ? and the answer is yes yes it did because that 's how it feels when someone kills your pet unicorn for no reason