remember when i was like i'm going to be the best blogger ever ! i'm going to post three times a day over the holidays ! that 's easy to say when you are ankle deep in a string of rick moranis posts and you 're still filled with that christmas optimism that says i will be able to find the time fourteen people staying in one house ? i'm staying in that house too ? bring it on ! i 'll find time to blog no matter what because i'm the awesomest blogger ever ! i'm unstoppable ! i'm like wolverine ! in hindsight , i can see that getting your hopes up was foolish i am a mortal blogger sharing a house with people , several of which are small children , i 've had a hangover for three days now and i'm pretty sure that i 've succeeded in giving myself type ii diabetes , so that will need to be attended to as well what i'm trying to say is that i overestimated myself i'm not like wolverine i'm more like that one guy whose only power is the ability to resemble a chicken only i do n't even have the ability to resemble a chicken at least not convincingly i mean , i can do a pretty awesome chicken impression , but i doubt i could fool anyone for even a second into believing that i am an actual chicken crap boyfriend just found me i 've been hiding upstairs , huddled in the least trafficked corner of the house , trying to write as quickly as possible before i am called downstairs to eat something called a dutch baby , which i am told it similar to a pancake , but i'm not buying it why would it be called a dutch baby if there were no babies in it ? either way , it sounds like a conspiracy to me and i'm probably going to be making my first foray into cannibalism wish me luck anyway , boyfriend walked in on me blogging in my corner and it was kind of like i had been caught eating an entire cake by myself or shooting up heroin or something he was like are you blogging ? ? me yes and you ca n't stop me boyfriend i was n't trying to stop you me good because if you did try , you would not succeed boyfriend what are you blogging about ? me about how i'm like wolverine but actually i'm not like wolverine because i'm more like the guy who can turn into a chicken but i ca n't turn into a chicken boyfriend i see so you ca n't turn into a chicken ? me no but i can do a pretty good chicken impression boyfriend prove it me that 's the emoticon for impressively accurate chicken impression boyfriend if you do n't put a picture of yourself doing that on your blog , i will be angry and i will stop loving you and i will set you on fire well , he did n't actually say that last part , but that was my interpretation of what he meant when he said you should put a picture of that on your blog his face is really what did all the talking at any rate , i do n't know if it would be a good idea to try to cram my first experience of cannibalism , the realization that i am more like a chicken than wolverine , the demise of my relationship and being set on fire all into one day so i'm posting the chicken picture if you look really closely , you can tell i'm not actually a chicken i'm just pretending and it 's nowhere near good enough to be considered a superpower yet