i was trying to decide what to call this post i really wanted to call it oh sh but could n't bring myself to do it i have tried to keep this blog somewhat upbeat thus far today i am going to deviate a bit because i am very frustrated note if you are the least bit squeamish , do not proceed ! ! for those of you who i am pretty close to remember the worst thing that jack ever did as a toddler ? the one that started about the time i was months pregnant with nathan and continued for a good months at every opportunity ? one that involved untold amounts of bleach , lysol , laundry detergent and many , many pairs of one piece pajamas ? god has a sense of humor here we go again , with nate nooooooo ! ! ! ! ! ! ! before proceeding , repeat after me he is cute , he is cute , he is cute there is a section of my autism journey guide called the poop pages what , you ask ? i do n't think i need to repeat it when jack was a little over two , we moved him into his big boy room , as we needed the crib for the new baby nap time became a nightmare to this day he has no shades on his windows because he used to yank them from the brackets he would knock every book he owned off of the bookcases , he would stand at the door and scream all while i was working down the hall and when none of that worked he went , how shall i say it diaper diving now i know that all little kids explore this avenue at some point in their childhood but kids on the spectrum take it to a whole new level tactile experiences are especially intense they either love or hate play dough , dirt , mud other umm , things both of my children appear to love tactile stimulation on the walls , their toys , themselves i think you get the point daddy affectionately coined the term smearcus funny how you can joke about stuff when it happens while you are at the office ! i started putting jack down for bed and nap with one piece pajamas on to curtail this issue which worked well until he figured out the zipper then we had to get footless one piece pajamas and put them on backwards so he could not get to the zipper he never necessarily outgrew this i just decided to give up on nap time because it was way too stressful and eventually and i do mean eventually he started using the potty consistently it is one of those parenting experiences where you thought you had reached the point where you could look back on it and laugh yeah , i'm not laughing anymore so natey started experimenting about weeks ago last thursday was the first really big incident and it was big and discovered about minutes before i had an appointment min from home awesome yesterday though yesterday was rough i had gone upstairs for minutes of respite after a very full day before we headed to rolly pollies as i was coming back down the stairs , i heard oh crap thus the title of the post from the front hallway then i observed daddy dashing up the stairs with natey in tow shortly thereafter why , son , why , why ? ? ? it always amazes me how grown men can completely freeze in the face of a little poop or puke i guess i am a bit insensitive to this since i worked on an oncology unit where this was just the norm and let 's face it we 're dealing with little kids what i encounter at home will never even compare to what i dealt with in the hospital not that it makes it any less disgusting anyway , so i decided to be nice and go upstairs and take over sometimes it does not pay to be a nurse ! the big question is there any way to make him stop doing this ? ? he understands no , but i do n't think he always connects his precise actions with us saying it unlike jack when he did this not that it made a difference at the time anyway we tell him no while cleaning him up , but the problem is he loves the shower loves it ! it 's like a party in the tub every time he does this great reward , no ? unfortunately i fear we are just going to have to do everything we can to prevent any opportunities and wait it out i was so hoping we would n't have to go through this a second time ! just not through your nose