by the time jack was nathan 's age i was taking him all over we did all kinds of fun things together i feel like nathan gets shafted all the time i never take just him anywhere so today that 's what i did nate and i went with our friends helen and lila up to the roar for autism for kennedy krieger in cockeysville i got some real quality time with the youngest member of our family the event itself is actually a bike ride nature walk , followed by a family fun festival we just went to the festival this year would 've done the nature walk but there were no strollers allowed it was great because it was not huge or overwhelming basically it was a huge playground and then several activities such as balloon animals , races , a couple of crafts none of which nathan participated in so we played on the playground and then went to the resource tent aha , mommy always has ulterior motives the resource tent can i camp out in the resource tent ? can my children and i live in the resource tent ? because the word tent implies that it is a place where one can stay , no ? i spent probably minutes in the little tent , talking to everyone i could , signing up for every mailing list i could find it has been one of my greatest frustrations on this journey that we have one of the most prestigious autism research facilities in the world in our backyard and we ca n't be seen there kennedy krieger does not take our insurance note the lingo of an insurance case manager most people would probably say that our insurance would n't cover it it 's mutual people sorry , soapbox time krieger does n't like the rate that my insurance is willing to pay , my insurance is not willing to pay what krieger wants both are likely being unreasonable meanwhile , my kids are the ones missing out i have done everything i can think of to keep the boys in that loop i located a kennedy krieger developmental pediatrician who also has a private practice where our insurance is accepted the boys have been there for developmental assessments so at least they are on her radar when she hears of studies , etc but i was hoping the resource tent might include some information on studies where i could initiate enrollment myself i was n't disappointed ! tomorrow i will set about emailing a bunch of primary investigators to see if the boys would be a good fit for individual studies and i am also expecting enrollment packages in the mail for the kennedy krieger school so we can get them on the waiting list the waiting list for autism programs and appointments is atrocious it is also a testament to how great the need is and how limited the resources are the resources ca n't keep up with the explosion in the number of new diagnoses while i understand this in theory , i am unwilling to allow this situation to affect my children 's care i have a feeling that i am going to have to become a very squeaky wheel , but i'm good with that on the positive side , the growth of autism diagnoses has spawned many new studies , and of course , these are not paid for by insurance , or the participants for that matter so we can go to kennedy krieger to participate in these they almost always involve at least or developmental assessments , in addition to genetic testing , other blood work and of course , interventions if this is the avenue i have to take to get the boys what they need , then so be it i spoke with a physician from kennedy krieger for quite awhile , she asked about the boys' current therapies , school , etc she talked to me about a few studies , and we parted ways while i was at another booth , she popped over and took down some more information on the boys call me , call me ! ! ! ! it 's like having a crush is my phone working ? ? how long will she wait to call ? too bad you ca n't check for a dial tone anymore nate seemed to have a good time and had only a few minor meltdowns there was a constant wait for the swings , no shock there for those that do n't know , swinging is particularly soothing for a lot of kids on the spectrum mine both have meltdowns whenever i try to take them off there was an elaborate network of bridges on the playset and nate found a triangular pattern to run in and repeated it about times then he ran laps he loves to run back and forth over and over again our friend lila joining nate in his running so i think nate liked being the big cheese for the day i certainly enjoyed it ! he conked out almost as soon as we hit the highway to go home his little buddy lila kept reminding her mommy and me to be quiet because the baby is sleeping such a cutie ! ! ! !