ok , the first part of this will be whining , but i 'll get it over with as quickly as possible ok ? earlier this summer i had scheduled myself to be off of work all week in case the funding for cisco center did n't come through then it did , hip hip hooray ! so in a shocking and selfish move , i kept two days all for me planned to work this mon , tues , wed , and then take off the rest of the week to get organized for the school year , buy school supplies and consign stuff that does n't fit anyone anymore well first , i had to schedule a study appointment for jack there goes friday morning , so john and i just decided to get the boys early from cisco and take them to see planes in the afternoon i am soooooo excited then last night i hear hacking from nathan 's room then sneezing , then coughing he ended up sleeping with us last night and there was no way i was going to expose a room full of special needs kids to an illness talk about a death wish , lol , so i kept him home there goes thursday i wo n't deny that no matter how much i love the kids , i was really looking forward to this time like really so i was pretty bummed but then nate and i snuggled in my bed until almost , and had a leisurely breakfast , then we played for awhile he seemed ok , so we went ahead to the consignment shop and dropped off a bunch of clothing and he still seemed fine , so we went to marshall 's , where we spent time just looking at toys and books for him he was beside himself with happiness , either over our one on one time or the toys , could n't quite tell when we were done , i plopped him in his seat , walked around , got into mine and turned around to this it appears it was the mommy time that he was happy about i am sure he was thrilled to be the one and only for a day this happens so rarely this smile completely turned my day around although honestly , i was already happy we went home and ate lunch , and then we both took a nice long nap he 's still sleeping in a stunning climax , i checked my messages and got the best email ever from the compounding pharmacy they ran nate 's mitochondrial cocktail through our insurance finally and guess what ? ? ? ? it's covered ! ! ! ! ! ! with a copay i am ecstatic ! ! ! ! ! ! so we should be getting a day supply by monday the flavor will be chocolate cherry if he will take that , then they will send his full prescription if not , we 'll try another flavor victory is sweet ! ! ! and apparently so are mitochondrial cocktails !