ok , since john has spent about an hour now laughing at all of the comments related to this article on the news website i am going to post them over here they really are too good to miss ! ! my wife did n't believe it at first but after a few months she could n't do without it she also uses it as an appetite suppressant , for headaches , pms and menstrual cramping , moodiness , an ocd medication for sexual addiction , gambling , smoking , drug alcohol abuse , shopping and talking on the phone texting , anti depression and anti anxiety relief , a topping for chocolate ice cream and a topical skin ointment it has always been nature 's cure all for women and their best source of protein try some today ! reply share john galt hours ago parent does she have a sister ? reply share socon hours ago parent no , she 's just a figment of his imagination reply share garylee hours ago parent come again ? reply share adt hours ago parent and again and again reply share jonathan hours ago parent and apparently again and again , again reply share robinnj hours ago parent you sir have made me laugh so hard ! ! ! ! ! ! ! reply share crazyhead hours ago parent you said hard ! reply share greg hazard hours ago parent mr doty ! you have a future in comedy ! ! ! ! i laughed so hard coffee came out of my nose ! reply share lazybum hours ago parent your lucky i was eating potaot chips reply share joel durham jr hours ago parent at least it was n't sperm reply share sam dennis hours ago parent give your wife that coffee same effect as sperm , although not as satisfying to you reply share ray o hours ago parent does she have time do anything else william ? your boys must be working overtime reply share knowsbettah hours ago parent good thing she 's not relying on you as her only supply reply share brett delong hours ago parent you forgot writer 's cramp , insomnia , hang nails , back pain , ice cream headaches , bruises , sprains , and flat feet reply share stucozza hours ago parent but will it cure the heartbreak of psoriasis ? reply share bagheera hours ago parent that comment was sick and wrong and so unbelievably funny ! you are the man ! reply share lucas mayflower hours ago parent i rarely laugh at any comments but that was awesome and you are hilarious reply share discustedone hours ago parent you must be a busy man acting like a pharmacy ! reply share aztec hours ago parent and , boy ! does it catch fish ! reply share the experimenter an hour ago parent oral acceptance of semen also cures menopausal hot flashes proven been there done that reply share crackpipe hours ago parent i laughed out loud let me know if i can help out reply share beedogs hours ago parent i'm willing to help her out when you run out of load reply share details for me hours ago parent rofl ! absolutely qualifies for best news article comment ever ! reply share roxanna hours ago parent i have n't laughed this hard in a long , long time ! ! ! great post ! ! ! reply share deegeejay an hour ago parent finally solved the mystery of the source of snake oil one eyed snake oil reply share richard lowery hours ago parent bwahahahahahaha ! ! ! ! reply share bob jones hours ago of course , had they swallowed to begin with , there would be no morning sickness reply share robert blakey hours ago parent i say the same thing every time my kids misbehave