nathan is turning this week six ! ! ! he has come so far , and we are so very thankful and here 's the thing , so have we , as his parents thus , we are not having a birthday party for nate this year parents can all acknowledge that the first few years of our kids' lives , the birthday parties are n't really about the kids they are about the parents , family and friends celebrating the child and the act of keeping them alive lol but as kids get older , that all changes the parties revolve around the child 's interests , their preferred activities , their preferred friends and that 's how it should be two years ago , jack 's wish was to go to the museum of natural history with mom and dad so that 's what we did what have we been doing with nathan ? we have been guessing he seems to like mickey , let 's try that this year what should we do ? who should we invite ? it has continued to be our friends , people we know through various organizations , autism causes , etc which is fine of course , but was it about nate and what he wanted ? well how could it be ? he ca n't tell us it 's very similar to how i continue to play detective whenever he is fussy , trying to figure out what is wrong he still ca n't tell me , although he is getting closer he watches the same scene of frozen over and over again does he like frozen ? or the movement of the snow in that scene ? or the noises ? or the song that is playing ? if i did a frozen themed birthday party would he love it ? or wish for an avalanche themed birthday party because that 's the part he is watching on repeat ? let 's take it a step further does he want a party ? does he like being in a crowd ? when do i , as his mother , know that he is actually happy ? ? here right here is my happy son below is a situation that would make most kids ecstatic i took nate to our local toy store today , just let him loose , and waited for him to find a toy he would like for his birthday there is a snip it of that situation in this video we were there for over an hour he sat on one riding toy , and played with the jingle bells i bought the riding toy but only after making sure the toy store accepted returns as with most things in our world , results are not typical so guess what ? we have decided birthdays will not be typical either ! i am not wrapping his presents this year , i am setting them up i have no expectation that he will play with any of them , at least not initially i have some new beads i will give him , because i know that will make him happy , and it 's his day he deserves to feel happy ! we will have chick fil a for dinner i will make a cake , with a little hill and olaf rolling down it aka the avalanche and we will probably all say what the what ? ? that happened if you 've seen the movie you know we will get in our jammies , and cuddle in bed with one of the sweetest boys who has ever lived and that is how we are gonna roll !