other than a dimple in a cute little chin , what 's more adorable than a toothless grin ? weeks ago yesterday ! ! ! ! there is entirely too much growing up going on in this household ! kindergarten in weeks , swimming like a little fish , and now lost teeth ! my own little snaggle tooth ! of course we do nothing in the typical fashion in this household , so when jack lost his first tooth and we told him about the tooth fairy , he was like no way , not in my room ! we literally had to sit down and write the tooth fairy a note asking her not to come just to calm him down he wanted nothing to do with it instead , he wanted to go to the smithsonian air and space museum , you know , like most kids , haha mom and dad certainly were n't going to say no to this , after all it is the only place one can go to see a bf messerschmidt in the area so we took the boys and they did pretty well other than being overwhelmed by the crowds it was hopping jack heaven ! ! so jack nonchalantly walked over to me yesterday while eating an apple , said here mom , and put something in my hand i asked what it was he calmly said my tooth ha ! i decided we were going to try something a little different i mentioned the tooth fairy in passing and he started in with no , no again then i asked him if it would be ok if we left the tooth under a pillow on the dining room table , just like we leave cookies for santa and carrots for the easter bunny that way , this fairy person would not have to intrude in his bedroom and to be honest , mommy and daddy are loathe to go in jack 's room when he is sleeping anyway out times he wakes up , but could still take his tooth and we could all be happy amazingly , he agreed ! so it was a success jack was excited to see that the tooth fairy had come this morning , no muss no fuss meanwhile , all john and i could do was stare at these two little teeth and think about how many sleepless nights they caused us , how many first foods they chomped , how many times we brushed them while our child with major oromotor issues screamed ahhhhhh sweet memories , lol