have n't posted about what 's going on with us in awhile long story short sick various types , various family members , various days daddy first got a man cold then natey and mommy got it on friday and it was a miserable one fever included even for the grown ups nate holds onto this stuff forever too , blah yesterday i was going stir crazy because while everyone else leaves the house daily for work , or kid activities , or school , i never ever leave and it can get a bit claustrophobic on the weekends i try to be out with the boys quite a bit , i just need to see other humans so jack and i headed across the bridge to visit grammy and granddad jack had a rough night saturday night , had been up on sunday since about am um , me too and so i was n't that surprised when he passed out in the car i was , however , surprised when i carried him into their house and he walked over to their couch , curled up and fell back asleep and stayed that way for almost hours my mom and i went shopping , came back , and he was still conked it took tries to get him to wake up i just kept looking at him thinking , what 's wrong , what 's wrong , what 's wrong this kid never gets sick , like , never we went home and he told me his tummy hurt ok , well we 're used to tummy issues so i told him to go to the bathroom and he did , and he said he felt better but he was n't asking for food every minutes , which is his typical mo i was a bit worried then , after his bath , he was wiggling his front tooth , went into the bathroom to look in the mirror , and came out , without the tooth where is it , we asked dunno he responds we could n't find it anywhere here is our little toothless wonder so after all of this , i ca n't even say i was surprised when i hear mommy , help ! ! ! ! at about pm last night i went in to check on him and found basically everything he had eaten all day all over the room poor boy ! ! ! ! ! it 's times like these when my husband is very grateful to have me , the former oncology nurse , for a wife , i know what he does n't quite get is that i used to gag all the time at my job , i just hid it well , and called for housekeeping if it was really bad well this was really bad ummm housekeeping ? the steam mop ca n't save me now ! oh well , i have certainly seen worse on the plus side i found his tooth ? why did i call this post the benefits of being sick ? after this little story ? like i said , jack is very rarely sick he almost never slows down and the boy is fast so i have to be honest , i just love it when he does slow down and snuggle with me and listen to me and talk to me like , full conversations without twenty prompts i hate him being sick , but i love love love this it 's kind of how i imagine it would be without the adhd like symptoms he so often exhibits i had to work today , have taken too many sick days lately , and he was so stinking cooperative at one point , i had a conversation with the medical director while he had his head lying in my lap and he did n't interrupt well holy crap ! that never happens i know most kids interrupt , but recall my stories of locking myself in my office and turning on the dryer to drown out the noise of him screaming continuously ? yeah , this was a really really nice change i got my full day of work in it was challenging , i'm not gonna lie , especially when nate came home , but i did it ! i do really hope he feels better in the morning he conked out at pm tonight never happens , even though my coworker reminded me this morning what comes after this peaceful sick period the roaring return of kiditude ish