dag nam it ! ! ! my great white hope has been at least temporarily dashed ! i mentioned in a recent post that i finally broke down and ordered melatonin for jack it is a natural sleep aid that many parents i have spoken with use for their children on the spectrum particularly kids with aspergers those brilliant little minds just ca n't seem to shut down enough to sleep through the night and after years of not sleeping through the night john and i are well , tired and john is cranky i , of course , am completely charming at all times right honey ? ? ? lol i figured that this weekend would be a great time to try it out , as jack is already exhausted to begin with from his first week of full day kindergarten surely this combination would give us a really really good chance of a full night 's sleep so i gave him a dropper full of melatonin at about last night by about his little eyelids were drooping , and john and i were practically salivating at the thought of him going to and staying in bed without a fight he passed out almost right away and nathan being nathan fell asleep while i was rocking him and singing maybe it 's a defense mechanism , haha so by we were free ! usually jack is up and down at least times before going to sleep , so this in and of itself was a pretty big victory we had a nice , quiet evening , went to bed , and then moooooooommmmmmmm ! ! ! ! ! help , starscream 's gun ! where did it go ? where is it ? help , help help ! ! ! you see , here was my first mistake yesterday afternoon , as a reward for being a good boy his first week of school i gave him a small transformer that becomes a plane i had to give it to him in the afternoon because of school , which is unfortunate because the first rule of giving a new toy particularly one that relates to an obsession to a kid with aspergers is that it must be given to them first thing in the morning it is the only way that they have the chance to calm down a little and be able to unwind enough to sleep by bedtime we have had many a sleepless night when jack has been given a new plane , or robot we once gave him a ride on airplane , right around the time nate was born , as a big brother present i had to cut a picture of the plane off of the box and tape it on the wall next to his bed in order to get him to lie down and none of us slept a wink that night i kinda hoped we were past that anyhoo , i found the gun without my glasses on it 's approximately the size of my thumb , so that was pretty impressive i told him to stay in bed returned to our bed thud ! ! ! mommy , daddy , my bed is too crowded ! i have to sleep with you ! ok , so the reasoning behind this excuse is a mystery to me twin bed to yourself , or a queen bed with people which has more space ? right ? so i walked him back to bed , told him if he wanted to keep starscream he 'd better stay put this time , and went back to our bed i ca n't be alone ! ! ! ! i'm so lonely ! ! ! mooommmmyyyy come here ! ! i need protection ! ! ! i sent john this time as i was not going to be so comforting at this point plus , john often conks out while in there , and jack follows suit , and then everyone sleeps no such luck john came back to bed after the requisite minutes and the rest of this early morning hours were spent shuffling back and forth , trying to get jack to stay in bed , and finally giving up at around then tolerating him lying between us and alternately kicking us in the face and shins depending on what position he had thrashed himself into at that point for about an hour then breakfast so i remain my same zombie self i fell asleep in the ot waiting area this morning , as usual we will try again tonight pray for us and for jack if he does n't sleep kidding kind of