this post is me complaining so if you do n't want to hear it stop here the schedule is getting kinda cramped again i did it to myself of course , but with the best of intentions i am still doing the massage for both boys , and although i ca n't say that i have seen major improvements at this point other than both boys tolerating more touch , i enjoy doing it i enjoy the time with each child and about weeks ago we started the ot listening program with jack http www vitallinks net it involves him listening to music twice a day for about minutes each time i know this does n't necessarily sound like it should take that much of my time , but we have to use these specific headphones and of course these headphones do not want to stay on the boy 's head i have wrapped the top in trainer 's tape and am now using a headband to hold them on , but i basically have to sit there and watch him the whole time in order to make sure he does n't take them off both boys are getting the shots x a week at this point on the bright side , jack no longer cries he screams at me to stop , giggles , and then goes back to what he was doing i think this is progress ? the new supplements just keep coming and coming i have been to jack 's school for a meeting every week for basically the past weeks he keeps hurting himself at school the school nurse and i are now on a first name basis i am going in for another meeting on thursday , and supposed to volunteer on wednesday been home with a sick natey the past days although this did give me a chance to try out my new steam mop i know , dare to dream ! i am constantly overwhelmed at home , overwhelmed to the point where sometimes all i can do is just sit there and think about everything i need to do this is not especially productive i guess i am saying that i am feeling that all too familiar drowning feeling that many moms experience i need a vacation i need a break a real one not two hours at target , or a taca meeting without the kids not the planned excursion for my birthday a taca conference with the husband i need an umbrella drink , a masseuse , a beach i actually did have a half hour massage last saturday wanna know what the masseuse said ? ? ? ? i do n't think i can really help you in this short a period of time , this is really bad after the thirty minutes , she poured some icy hot on my back and we called it a day actually helped quite a lot , i recommend trying it if you have n't before and here i thought it was only good for shin splints back to this whole vacation idea who gives the shots when i run away from home ? who knows how to give this massage ? it 's only going to get worse in the next few weeks , as our sitter is leaving us how dare she move to pa to be with her own grandkids ? ? ? so now i have a daycare search to conduct , which is one of my least favorite activities ok , i'm done