so much to say , so much to say first i would have to say that john has earned the husband gold star for the day not only did he watch the boys for hours so that i could embark on this trip down memory lane , but when the power went out yes , you read that correctly , the power went out again , his text to me said , and i quote we will be fine hon , do n't worry that means more than all the flowers in the world love you and thank you ! and luckily , this time it was only a few hours so today i headed home for the day the main purpose of the trip was to attend one of my oldest friend 's baby shower , but being the multi tasker that i am , i managed to cram this day as full of meaning as i possibly could i took my mom with me , it was our first outing without the boys since , well , since jack was born that would be years people it was also my first trip back home since before john and i got engaged so that would be years holy moly ! yep , no resemblance at all when i tell people i'm from jersey i know that it conjures up a certain image smoke stacks right ? allow me to introduce you to my new jersey medford lakes square mile , beaches , countless bike trails , golf course , trading post , church , police station , elementary middle schools and that is all our old house some pictures of our town bike path beach so as you can see , it 's beautiful i was very very lucky to grow up here at least from age on our little neighborhood was especially tight , i had three moms and dads , and felt completely at ease walking into all of those homes unannounced i babysat all of the kids in the neighborhood , most since infancy and yes , they have all pretty much graduated from college at this point , gasp , i am old ! my mom and i met up with one of my other moms and a close friend of the whole family for brunch today it was just wonderful meet dad , dan hilarious guy who is currently working with mom on completely gutting house that they have renovated in medford lakes i will never forget the first time i babysat at their house i was the first thing he said to me was stay out of the liquor cabinet ! you have to know me pretty well to understand just how absurd of a statement this was i was pretty tame of course , he also happened to spot me the one time i smoked a cigarette in high school , and i was like a mile from our house he held it over my head for years i told my mom about it today , ha here is mom bobbie we had an awesome brunch and had a chance to catch up had n't seen her since my wedding day ! love her ! after brunch we headed over to my friend pam 's childhood home pam is one of my oldest friends , one of the first people i met when i moved to new jersey we were we have been lucky enough to stay in pretty close touch she moved to annapolis shortly after jack was born , and just recently left me to move to north carolina with her husband sigh , if you must i have never been so happy to see one of my friends preggers ! she looks fabulous , and there 's just something about seeing an old friend so happy i asked her today if she remembers why her nickname was pamer , and she had no idea either gorgeous pregnant lady ! mom won ! pamer and her mommy ! despite hours in the car , today left me feeling so invigorated ! i forgot how much it means to feel like you 're home i forgot how great it is to drive down a street and have a hundred memories come to mind i think i need to go home more often !