sigh mommy is annoyed , really , really annoyed last weekend when we were at the conference , i visited a booth for a private aba provider their flyer said that they accepted cigna we have cigna ! goody ! i was talking insurance talk with the representative and she said that although they have a contract with cigna , they have never had a client successfully get services with this insurance well , i am an insurance case manager right ? so i thought i would at least explore the first thing i checked was the state law discouraging fact maryland has no mandate for insurance companies to provide autistic children with aba applied behavioral analysis therapy it has gone before the legislative session multiple times and never passed let me explain why this is a travesty the medical community at large still does not acknowledge autism as a medical problem it is considered strictly behavioral therefore , the only therapy that said community recognizes as legitimate for autism treatment is aba this is why ot has to be billed as developmental delay and not autism ot would not be covered for autism and speech has to be billed as speech delay , not autism none of these services are covered for autism a neurology consult similarly would be billed as some type of neurological deficit , but not autism the insurance would not pay if it was billed as autism so to discover that the one widely accepted therapy for autism is not mandated in our state made me , well , really really pissed ok , well we have private insurance , right ? it does n't have to be mandated for them to cover it so i called the aba company and asked for the cpt codes they use for aba , then called our insurance company no one knew what aba was awesome i realized that this was because i had n't selected behavioral health mainly because i know that autism is not just a behavioral problem it 's roots are deeply based in medical issues oh well , so i called back and asked for behavioral when i asked about aba , the representative asked , are you worried that your child might have autism ? i kind of laughed and said no , my child does have autism she gasped and said , do n't you have an autism case manager ? ha she further stated that i need a case manager for my son because there are additional benefits for children with autism well this is news to me , because when i do a provider search on the behavioral website and enter autism as the speciality , big blinking letters pop up and warn me that this service may not be covered for the diagnosis of autism which , frankly , is why the insurance company has not been aware of my kids' autism we do n't need any added challenges anyway , the rep said she was going to assign us to a case manager and expedite it i guess that 's what you get when they know you 're a case manager too ok , so i got sucked in maybe they are going to help i mean , they do n't have autism case managers sitting there to do nothing do they ? ? so i was happy to hear from holly today until she said that aba is not a covered benefit for the cigna plans in our state because it is not mandated funny , because if medical necessity is shown it is covered by medicaid which , i pay for but not by my private insurance , which incidentally i also pay for she went on to tell me that our family qualifies for psychotherapy extra sessions , due to our children 's conditions jackpot baby ! ! not i laughed and said , funny , because my therapist informed me last night that my visits are being audited i guess i have been seeing a therapist too regularly ? i told my therapist that i would be glad to turn on the crazy if needed , or explain to them that this process has taken a bit longer due to both of my sons both being diagnosed with autism and our first therapist who was in network by the way losing his license due to misconduct in the middle of our work so i'm awful sorry for the delay if only i had known that having autistic children means i get to talk to someone more i would have come forward with this long ago sorry for the bitter tangent , but wait , i'm not done ! i go to look up the forbidden autism specializing therapists , knowing that they are no longer off limits , and lo and behold , there are about aba therapist on the freaking list ! so i gave holly a jangle and said , ummm , what the heck is this ? she explained that even though they are theoretically in network we can not use them because we do n't have the benefit ummm does n't that make them out of my network ? ? ? so now i plan to search for an aba therapist who also happens to be lcsw or an liscensed psychologist but after the experience that john and i had last year , i am very weary of allowing my children to have therapy i just do n't trust therapists in general after that we have been very fortunate to have the person we are currently working with , but that came only after a wretched experience with someone that did way more harm then good i think i will insist on being in the room if i take them to a non aba or covert aba therapist well that 's an hour of my life that i 'll never get back