i 've mentioned before that both of the boys are on special diets one word for this expensive ! ! ! jack is currently on a gluten and casein free diet he showed sensitivities to both and has been since september we have definitely seen some improvement in his over all behavior and concentration this diet is not easy , that 's for sure think of almost everything convenient that you feed your kids , and take it away then for about of those items , double the price and make them available only at a grocery store minutes from your home exit yogurt , cheese , milk , anything breaded , regular bread , most cereals , ice cream oh , and family occasions ? be prepared to make separate holiday dinners for your kids , unless of course you can find a way to work their stuff into the repertoire see photo from christmas who knew you could make a gluten and dairy free yule log ? birthday parties ? bring your own cake ! oh , and pizza , or whatever else they might be having how about school parties ? christmas stockings ? easter baskets ? valentine 's day ? i may sound like i am complaining , but really i'm just trying to help everyone understand the implications of simple dietary changes there is no doubt that we are very lucky to be doing this now and not years ago the variety and availability of products has increased exponentially and some of the stuff is really good ! not that i eat it , i ca n't afford it , haha that 's the main issue for us cost there are ways to save amazon is my friend you can buy in bulk and schedule the items to be shipped every so many months convenient for those things you know your kid likes and will want again other than that whole foods , and our local organic market my sister calls it whole paycheck foods word nate 's diet was initially the same as jack 's but we were n't really seeing the same improvement despite the fact that his sensitivities were more severe than jack 's look out , a little science lesson coming not appetizing just sayin' one of the tests our pediatrician did on nate was to check for yeast in his gi tract will not explain this process , will just say that daddy is very glad that mommy is a nurse , ha so his results showed an unusually high amount of yeast in his gi tract , the same organism that causes things like thrush this can effect digestion greatly , particularly the body 's ability to properly break down nutrients the other issue is that yeast feeds on sugar not gluten , not dairy , but sugar if sugar is not broken down in digestion , it remains in the gut , creating a happy home for yeast a self perpetuating problem the first intervention we tried was medication nystatin to kill the yeast , and multiple probiotics times a day for weeks i did see some brief improvement , but the symptoms came back rapidly when we stopped treatment and nate hated this medication so much that i could not get him to take any other oral meds for months after this the diet that we decided to try with nathan is the specific carbohydrate diet basic theory is to cut out all sugars other than the most simple , easily digestible sugars see the very basic explanation by following this link http pecanbread com p scdscience html so now not only was nate eliminating gluten and dairy , but all complex carbohydrates as well one of the symptoms of yeast overgrowth and food sensitivity is the child exhibiting cravings for the things that they should not have nathan was text book , and it all started when i weaned him from breastfeeding not just the cravings , but the autistic behaviors it corresponds perfectly in my opinion first , nathan would have bathed in cow 's milk if i let him when i started giving him milk in his bottles he would drink oz at a time and table foods carbs , carbs , carbs now i know all little kids are like that to a certain extent , but nate was extreme think bread ! when we removed gluten it did n't matter , the gluten free bread was just as alluring to him when i started this diet , nate was like a child possessed he boycotted eating almost everything for the first few days , and had horrible gi upset here is what he could have chicken boiled , eggs , ground beef , white grape juice , homemade gelatin he never accepted this for days this is the intro diet sounds kinda like atkins right ? after the first days , i slowly added other foods in , cooked fruit , ripe banana , squash , then slowly other fruits and vegetables and nuts and nut products he can never have grain on this diet , corn , potatoes , table sugar , etc here are the stages http pecanbread com p how stages html so this was really really hard ! nate did n't understand why everything basically tasted like crap all of the sudden , poor baby the first time i gave him homemade apple sauce after the intro , you would have thought it was crack he has adjusted to a certain extent although he is still very selective about what he will eat and getting vegetables into him is a challenge every day he is on so many supplements that i do n't worry too much about his actual nutrition , but i do want him to eat a variety the average amount of time on this diet is about a year once the yeast have starved due to lack of sugar , the gi tract can repair itself and the issues can basically be fixed not that it could n't happen again simple things in early childhood for sensitive kids , such as multiple rounds of antibiotics can wipe out the normal flora of the gut and predispose the child to these conditions some say vaccines can also effect the balance many theories swirling around out there right now nate 's favorite food is chicken nuggets what , you ask ? they are organic chicken breasts dipped in egg and rolled in almond flour very finely ground almonds and spices and sauteed in coconut oil i made pounds of them last night and froze them this will last about weeks requires a pound of almond flour guess how much ? ? ? for a pound ! ! ouch he loves his applesauce , which i make in the slow cooker , and the infamous banana pancakes who woulda thought that mixing eggs and two bananas would yield actual pancake looking and tasting food ? , and almond flour flatbread and some fruits and veggies and beef or fish , if he would eat it oh , and almond butter something amazing ? about weeks ago i decided to introduce peanut butter he has no sensitivity to peanuts and it was next on the list , so let me tell you , within about hours , both his father and i were noticing more self stimulating activity , lack of concentration , etc and guess what ? his sitter and teachers did not know we introduced this and they mentioned it too ! so i removed it , he was n't ready , problem solved has this diet fixed the problem ? not by a long shot my feeling on the matter is that it certainly is not doing any harm to the boys other treatments are much more invasive and have side effects , etc so why not try this ? what 's a little time and money when their health is at stake , right ?