so many parents that i talk to complain about all of the bickering that goes on between their children constant fighting for toys , attention , tv shows , etc i long for this everyday do n't get me wrong , i am sure that after awhile it would be annoying , but right now i ca n't see that far right now i am grateful for every moment that the boys notice each other 's presence before nathan regressed , the boys were starting to play together , but in the past months that has pretty much stopped altogether they both have social deficits and there have been days where i truly do n't think they have interacted at all as i have mentioned before , jack has been making great strides socially he is playing with other kids with much more frequency and realizing that he can have conversations with them as well a few weeks ago , jack saw one of his cousins , who is about months younger than nathan he came home and told me all about how his cousin said this , and his cousin said that , including jack he then looked at us and asked us why nathan does n't talk to him we explained that he 's having a hard time learning , but that he goes to a school to help him everyday and that jack can help him too by talking to him he has asked me this question multiple times since then , and even bent down in nathan 's face on various occasions and said nathan , talk ! amen , jack if only it were that simple nathan 's language continues to stagnate despite all of his therapies i recently started looking for other specialists to help us and in doing so spoke with one of the leaders of the support group i attend she recommended one doctor who is nearby , who wait for it takes insurance ! my friend and i often joke about the foibles of practitioners who take insurance seems like all the good practitioners these days do n't need to other than pcp 's so while i was thankful , i will admit i was suspicious so i called the office to request an appointment and the receptionist told me that the doctor prefers to do phone consults regarding the children before he will see them , to see if they will be a good fit ummm , ok so when will this consult take place ? i am told the doctor does phone consults on mon , tues , and thurs between am when there is a full moon , haha ok , so this guy takes insurance when he does n't have to and then consults with new patients in the early morning on his own dime ? i am told that he will be at home , and may be going about his daily tasks , but that he will listen and hopefully be willing to take the boys on so yesterday i locked myself in the bathroom for what parent is able to speak sanely at this time of day with breakfast school shenanigans going on ? and called the first thing i heard ? ? ? ? swish spit awesome then good morning , how can i help you ? so is he flossing while i tell him the boys' story ? guess what ? do n't care ! floss away buddy , as long as you help my kids ! the actual conversation involved very little information exchange , as when i tell anyone that i have two children on the spectrum , they immediately want to see us there was talk of amino acid and heavy metal testing , changes in supplements , etc so i am excited ! let 's get going ! and we only have to wait weeks sigh ok , i can do this weeks is nothing in the autism world right ? does n't matter mommy is impatient ! so back to the boys jack seems determined to make nathan interact with him this is so amazing ! while it is heartbreaking to hear him say talk ! over and over to him , he is getting through , slowly but surely they are starting to play at times jack has figured out that nathan loves to play chase , so he will go up to him , start laughing in his face and bumping him until nathan starts running then they are off ! all over the place they run , both of them laughing like little crazies mommy bliss of course jack quite often breaks out the pinchers and after that things have a tendency to go downhill but it 's fun while it lasts this morning for the first time , jack went into nathan 's room to say good morning while nate was still in his crib my mom has always told me stories of how my older sister used to get me out of my crib in the morning to go watch cartoons until now , i had really no hope of anything like this ever happening we sat and listened to jack talk at nathan for a good minutes poor nate at one point we heard a shrieked say hermit crab , then your face looks funny , and you must be a genius ! say something the second two are undoubtedly movie quotes , in case you are wondering but nathan babbled back some of the time , and laughed some as well i got the boys dressed and brought them downstairs for breakfast jack sat in his booster seat and then asked to be scooted closer to nathan yes , i got teary , and yes i took a picture good , good morning over here ! quick side note , i went to a stella and dot jewelry party last night and discovered that they have a bracelet line that benefits autism speaks of the proceeds from the sale of these bracelets are donated to the organization they have different styles , and they are very cute i will post the link check it out , it 's for a great cause ! http shop stelladot com style bc en us support autism speaks shine sole bracelets html