i took the boys for a haircut this morning if you have any experience with an autistic child or a child with sensory issues , i need not say more i dread this task more than almost any other with the boys the day started off well , boys slept till am , which is heaven , and we headed out to our weekly ot appt at a we walked in and jack saw his girlfriend therapist and said good morning miss sam stop the presses ! ! ! ! ! ! he did n't say have you seen a hermit crab , killer whale , wall e ! she and i looked at each other and just grinned progress ! while the boys are in their sessions mommy gets minutes of time all to herself ! i have made friends with one of the receptionists whose daughter is also on the spectrum , she had several books waiting for me this morning and we had our usual chat i am continually astounded by how many kind and generous people i have met on this journey the support is just amazing about minutes into the session , natey came rip roaring into the reception area with his therapist chasing him and dove into my bag to grab his cup he is obsessed with his juice because it is one of the only sweet things he can have poor miss myrna could n't catch him before he made it ! too funny so after the boys were done , we headed over to hair cuttery i woke up this morning and just told myself , this morning is going to suck and then it will be over easter is coming and it has to happen it took minutes for anyone to acknowledge our presence , and then i was told there was a minute wait it was raining , so we were stuck i had the urge to run but had to get it over with the boys were great while we waited however , jack has gone from not talking to many people to talking to everyone we were sitting by the door and he had a strong need to show every person who walked in the door the hermit crab that he and miss sam made out of a paper plate and pipe cleaners in ot this morning and tell them his name and show them how the crab moved and tell them all about hermit crabs all about them most people are very sweet with jack , he 's , he 's cute , and he smiles and makes eye contact what 's not to love ? but after the first minutes , it 's time to move on , and jack does n't get this concept so he keeps going , and going that 's when it gets awkward luckily he was in a listening mood , and stopped when i reminded him that not everyone loves hermit crabs nate was enthralled with a picture on the wall and pretty much spent the whole wait staring at it did i mention the wait was actually minutes , not ? god give me strength let me explain something about the boys , and most children with autism sounds are very intense to these children , as are vibrations trimmers are out and their ears are very sensitive to touch if it 's a night to clean ears i have to take like minutes to prepare myself and then be ready for jack to try to bite me the entire time it 's really not his fault he does not do this at any other time oh except nail trimming every time i take the boys for a haircut i explain this to their stylist i have tried everything to get him to allow the trimmers mommy would love to space haircuts out further , believe me , i have tried telling him they are wall e 's cousin , i have tried rewards , nada all of the stylists poo poo me and then proceed to put the trimmers on his hand and turn them on just to show him and he freaks predictably mommy is not a moron people other than that , and major squirming jack does pretty well at this point but nathan whoa he is like a little bucking bronco the minute i put him on the seat today i did the unthinkable just so i would n't be asked not to bring him back ha i gave my complex sugar free kid a freaking lollipop and i'm not sorry , so there ! it bought us minutes after that it was scream central , with mommy holding his head in a vicelike grip and the stylist moving at the speed of sound but we made it probably only people stopped and stared major victory so i tipped the stylists generously and we were done ! ! ! ! ! very proud of them reward is chick fila they have grilled chicken nuggets they both can have them ! ! ! ! and gluten free fries , which jack can have god bless chick fila the only place mommy can get the boys take out ! oh , and see nathan below ? ? eye contact ! ! good day completely irrelevant to the post or maybe not , but saw this today and felt like sharing