when you have two kiddos with autism each with extremely different sensory needs , a simple task like taking a ride in the car can turn into quite the adventure read nerve jangling disaster the car issues all started right after nate was born jack was about two and a half and almost immediately after i brought nate home jack started screaming bloody murder every single time i turned on the turn signal how many three year olds become conditioned to , instead of screaming , say mommy is a law abiding citizen when mommy turns on the turn signal ? it was the only work around i could think of at the time he also went through a period where if i drove past a large group of trees or anything else that generated shade , he would have a complete meltdown about the shadows in the car as though i can control that ? and the radio issue continues it must be turned off before we pull into the driveway or all hell breaks loose and he can tolerate a very short playlist of songs he used to scream about this as well , but we have worked on him simply saying skip if the music is bothering him this doesn t even cover the whole driving thing i can t turn corners unless i do so very slowly or he screams , can t drive behind certain cars , or let alone buses if we are caught in traffic he yells we re still moving ! ! ! ! speed bumps they re bad news jack shouts every time we go over one he also notices immediately if i take a different route than usual and this upsets him quite a bit i get that he is not doing this to be difficult and feel really bad that he experiences these things so intensely i m just saying it makes for interesting driving thus far in life , mr nate has been very straight forward he cries for one reason when we are in the car if we stop recently he seems to be noticing this quite a bit more in the last week it has escalated , and it s pretty darn cute he sits in the back seat and if i stop or even slow down he yells go , go , go ! ! ! i feel like a sled dog , he may as well shout mush ! mush ! honestly , i try to speed up when he does this , or pray for the green light i want him to feel empowered when he makes the effort to communicate with me in the mean time between my two kids i am starting to question who is actually driving this car