ok , i will admit it nathan is starting to look like a little vagabond he has had such a rough time with haircuts lately that i have been putting it off for well let 's just say awhile i mean , he starts crying when we pull into the parking lot of the haircut place and i have yet to find a place that is really sensory friendly for the boys to go for their haircuts i am open to suggestions , if you have any , spill the people at the hair cuttery have been just plain old rude i walked in with nate this evening and the receptionist immediately said , it 's going to be at least an hour this with an empty waiting room and the stylists chatting , she further explained that they all had appointments coming up i wanted to scream , it 's taken me months to work up the motivation to bring this kid , and it will take you minutes please ! ! ! but of course , instead , i said thank you very much we 'll try another time do not suggest that cute kid 's place in annapolis either pigtails and crewcuts , worst ever try taking your child with asperger 's , who is obsessed with airplanes , to a place where he gets to sit on a silver propeller plane for his haircut or wait minutes specifically for said plane , get to sit on it for minutes and then leave it 's not a pretty picture ! ! ! so yeah , we stopped going there my aunt happened to send me the link to an amazing place for kids like mine in california sigh http www thairapyhairsalon com here is the description for exceptional clientele thairapy hair salon is a family salon specializing in and catering to our clientele with autism and special needs from our sensory wall , to our wheelchair accessible shampoo bowl station , to our specially trained therapy dog arriving in december we are continuously striving to offer the best of the best to each and every one of our clients thairapy hair salon is here to change the way parents and kids feel about haircut day we look forward to seeing you ! this sounds amazing ! ! ! ! ! ! ! so , if anyone in maryland knows of someone looking for a new career path there would be a huge market for this type of facility in our area please , please , please please ? ? ? ? it 's so exciting to see these types of places popping up i mean , i realize that i am already very blessed we have a gluten free bakery , excellent county schools , a special needs daycare , awesome ot , and amazing doctors all within minutes of our house but i want this too ! so once i realized the haircut was n't going to happen today , i decided to run a few errands with nathan no big deal right ? actually , it 's a very big deal first of all , he and i rarely get one on one time it seems , and when we do it 's because daddy and jack are out somewhere and we are home and if i go out , i usually take jack nate is so easily overstimulated that he usually melts down pretty quickly when we do go out i am slowly getting over the meltdown thing though not like i have a choice so we went to babies r us to pick up a gift i was very proud of him , other than throwing his cup every seconds and screaming bloody murder every time i stopped the cart for more than seconds , he held it together pretty well there were only a couple of dark moments for mommy up until this point , when i have had nathan out with me , people have said things like what a cute baby or hi sweetie today , several times actually , a salesperson , or another customer asked him a question what have you got there buddy ? and are you helping mommy ? nothing he 's not a baby anymore and he does n't answer questions , he rarely speaks i'm still excited if i say ready , set and he says go the looks are starting the concerned faces , and even occasional looks of disapproval but how does one respond in this situation ? i certainly am not going to explain why he is not speaking to every tom , dick , and harry i am not going to plaster a bumper sticker for autism speaks across his forehead so i guess i just have to stand there and play dumb ? or act like it 's perfectly normal ? when jack is with us , he overshadows nathan so much that this really does n't come up but i have to admit that it is becoming more obvious to the outside observer that something is off i have to think on this for awhile i have to come up with some type of defense mechanism to get through this because the whole eyes filling with tears thing is n't going to cut it in the long term i know i will grow a thicker skin and i still have hope that maybe someday nathan will answer them in the meantime , i am at a bit of a loss once again , suggestions welcome from my mommies unless it is something like what are you looking at or f off not gonna work for me and it would be just my luck that nathan would choose that moment to start repeating me ha ! at this point , if he told someone to f off i would probably clap , cry and jump up and down once again , the new normal for exceptional clientele thairapy hair salon is a family sa for exceptional clientele thairapy hair salon is a family salon specializing in and catering to our clientele with autism and special needs from our sensory wall , to our wheelchair accessible shampoo bowl station , to our specially trained therapy dog arriving in december we are continuously striving to offer the best of the best to each and every one of our clients thairapy hair salon is here to change the way parents and kids feel about haircut day we look forward to seeing you ! for exceptional clientele thairapy hair salon is a family salon specializing in and catering to our clientele with autism and special needs from our sensory wall , to our wheelchair accessible shampoo bowl station , to our specially trained therapy dog arriving in december we are continuously striving to offer the best of the best to each and every one of our clients thairapy hair salon is here to change the way parents and kids feel about haircut day we look forward to seeing you ! for exceptional clientele thairapy hair salon is a family salon specializing in and catering to our clientele with autism and special needs from our sensory wall , to our wheelchair accessible shampoo bowl station , to our specially trained therapy dog arriving in december we are continuously striving to offer the best of the best to each and every one of our clients thairapy hair salon is here to change the way parents and kids feel about haircut day we look forward to seeing you !