i have heard so many times just how lucky i am to work from home and i agree between going to the boys' appointments , being here for deliveries and service appointments , and having unlimited good coffee , it 's a pretty sweet deal today however , i would like to pay tribute to what my life has been like since jack was born since he was an infant , i have had daycare until approximately pm each day there have been short periods where i have asked the sitter to stay later , but for the most part this has been it so i have daycare hrs a day before nathan was born , i actually had some people ask me if daycare was really necessary could n't jack just hang out while i do that little job of mine ? bah ! i say bah ! would you bring your child to work every single day and let them hang out during your meetings ? listen to you talk about serious medical issues that are not always very appetizing ? let your clients listen to them scream in the background and demand more pb j ? did n't think so this is not some little job or hobby of mine one of our first sitters would at times act like i was doing nothing all day , or make comments that it was nice that i could have that time to myself and keep my hand in my area of interest used to make me so mad ! i work a hour a week real job i am not one to toot my own horn , but finally one day , after months of hearing this , i pulled her aside and explained to her that this was basically a husband wife scenario she never mentioned it again that being said , i have used working from home as an opportunity to save a bit on daycare my husband happens to get home fairly early from work , so if i have more calls to make , i can make them once he gets home or , as i have mentioned before , lock myself in the bathroom it 's very glamorous , this career of mine so we are nearing one finish line of sorts jack full day kindergarten his school has the late start time , which means he will not be getting off the bus to come home until pm what ? ! ? ! first of all , i am concerned about him handling this late of a day but honestly , the thing that first comes to mind is free at last ! ! ! ! ! ! jack is an awesome kid he is also an incredibly verbal kid with zero concept of quiet , inside voice , whisper , etc at least not at home he did pretty well at school after awhile last year i try like anything to have all of my important calls for the day made before the sitter leaves , or to schedule them for after john is home the best laid plans never work i have found myself working in some very awkward situations over the past years locked in my office with both kids screaming and pounding on the door while i talk to the medical director in a calm , professional manner yes , of course my kids will both need therapy , sigh , throwing stuff in the crock pot while talking to another coordinator , stopping the spin cycle on my washing machine every time i receive an incoming call yes , my office is in the laundry room talk about your glamour or there was that period where jack would wait until the sitter left , defecate , and decorate at almost daily even with all of the precautions i would take those days were rough bottom line i am a survivor ! what will the days be like now ? both boys to school by am i will still have to have the sitter right now b c nathan has to be driven back and forth to aba until he is , at which time he too will go on a bus nathan takes a nap in the afternoon jack will be at school until almost pm ? seriously ? ? ? my spreadsheets are going to be spotless ! my nerves will no longer be fried ! i will not be redirecting a small child every seconds with my hands while trying to talk to someone like a grown up ! like i said freedom ! things i will not miss about seconds later and about minutes later those are the things i won't miss does this mean i wo n't cry like a baby when i put him on that bus ? ha , i am sure you all know better by now