this is a mama post very little to do with the kiddos you 've been warned ! ! i posted before and after weight loss pictures the other day on facebook and got about a bazillion how ? ? questions so now i am sharing all that i have done the realistic answer is the one we all hate to hear diet and exercise that being said , over the past years i have tried so many diets it is ridiculous , dr oz cleanses , weight watchers , shakeology , other shake programs , the hcg diet , essential oils , voodoo kidding i could never sustain any of it i drank a cleanse shake twice a day about a year ago for months that was recommended by a homeopath , it literally tasted like chalk by the end of this i was actually gaining weight i shredded , i day fixed , i did insanity max it all hurt like hell and i did n't see the results i wanted and needed we all need a catalyst to change something that drives us i will admit that for me , while i would like to say it was an internal drive to better myself , the initial trigger was caused by an external factor , which was my sisters wedding i had been looking forward to the day she got married basically since the day she was born she is years younger than me , but when it was finally happening i was terrified at the thought of wearing a bridesmaids dress with a bunch of women at least years younger than me and i was the heaviest i had ever been i did n't want to embarrass myself , or even worse , her cue all the diet craziness the hardcore attempts started last january and did not go very well at all about a month after me , a neighbor started a medical weight loss program i watched her weight seem to literally fall off obviously not the case but compared to me it sure seemed like it ! ! about months later a good lbs less for her and probably lbs more for me , i finally decided i was going to find a way to stomach the cost of the program she was using and get myself in there ! i was in a time crunch it took over a month to get an appt , by the time i got started it was june rd two months from the wedding i had little hope i would see a difference by then but i was not giving up without a fight we went to the beach for a week during my first week on the diet i literally sat in an ice cream shop across from my whole family eating sundaes while i drank a lemon diet shake one of the hardest weeks of my life i lost pounds here is the website for the program , run by a local pcp it is not one of the big popular diets , but the products used are prescription and available through other practices http livelyte com the program involves shakes , bars , puddings and soups it is very restrictive and high protein there are weekly classes and the program is supervised by a doctor and a nutritionist , who when you get close to your goal weight help you adapt back to regular foods , which i have been doing for the past months you continue to lose weight as you adapt , if you follow the instructions and now i am at maintenance after about a week on the program i started adding in exercise first jillian michaels shred it took me days instead of her prescribed to get to level which is killer but i have abs and nice arms for the first time in my adult life and i highly recommend it ! ! about two weeks into that i started couch to k , which is a nice slow progression to running a k i ran the full distance the thursday before my sisters wedding i will disclose that i ran cross country in high school and ran some as an adult , so it was n't all new to me , but i promise you this it was like new with how out of shape i was when i started ! ! ! by the wedding i was down lbs , not nearly where i had wanted to be , but a huge relief after where i had started the dress i had tried on and cried over in june was taken in by about two sizes , so that was good after the wedding , one of the medical technicians at the program said , so are you finished now ? and that 's when it hit me that no , i was not , if i was going to work this hard , i may as well finish what i started ! i have lost the other lbs i always wanted gone i ran a k , then a half marathon i kept doing jillian michaels shred on my off days from running it 's minutes people we can do anything for minutes ! ! i can plank row with the best of them these days ! and i try to log at least miles running each week it 's not easy with the kids schedules , therapies , countless iep meetings etc , but it is worth it and not just for me they have a completely different , energized mama who takes them on outings after her mile runs on the weekends not to mention a happy mama ! jack observes my jillian michaels and tries to do it with me he stands behind me and tells me i am making a good choice he has been my biggest cheerleader so there is no big mystery here , lots of hard work , an investment of time and money , and a good team of professionals but if i can do it anyone can full time job , two special needs kids these things just mean time management is everything and now i have a new sanity saver running it is everything to me and boy did i get my results ! ! !