as i mentioned earlier , my new wheelchair is too tall to fit in the back of my current minivan since i was already looking at replacing our van , i have been doing some research one thing i learned right away is that there are dozens of considerations and options in today 's article , i will list the considerations and options that i am aware of so far understanding what my needs are or will be will help my mobility dealers make recommendations and help me end up with the right vehicle considerations how much can i afford or am willing to pay ? will i finance the van or pay cash ? will the dealer accept a trade in ? how many people will you be transporting , , , or more ? how much interior height room do i need in the back , middle , or front driver passenger area ? will i transfer from the chair to the driver or passenger seat ? is there an emergency exit in case of an emergency i e , loss of power ? how much driving do you plan on annual mileage estimate will help decide whether a new or used van is needed ? will you need the van for anything special requiring more ground clearance or storage capacity ? will you be driving or do you want to sit in the front or are you comfortable sitting in the back or middle ? can you transfer to a regular car seat or do you have to remain in the wheelchair ? will both you and your significant other be driving ? do you feel comfortable ordering a van from a company out of the area without seeing or driving it ? do the exterior color and style matter ? would you accept any make and model , or do you have a preference ? will the van be the primary family vehicle or a second car ? financial consideration do you want a new van or will a used one work ? are there any rebates available ? length of ownership consideration how long do you plan to keep the van and what will your progression be during that period ? how much entry height do i need door clearance ? how much interior height do i need to inches ? would i prefer a minivan or a full size van driving preference ? do you want mechanical or are manual straps tie downs acceptable ? do you need hand controls for braking and acceleration ? is the price negotiable ? van options full size or minivan ramp vans rear entry side entry with ramp in floor , under floor , or fold down lift vans rear lift with exterior storage rear lift with interior storage side lift with interior storage rear hoist with interior storage lowered floor , , inches higher door entrance to inches driver or passenger transfer seats interior or exterior transfer removable passenger or driver seat mechanical i e , ez lock tie down or manual straps one company i contacted requires that if you plan to drive from a wheelchair that you need to go through a driver evaluation and assessment program at your own expense offered through the same company the company has a liability concern and wants to know your capabilities to drive and what options you will need to drive i e , hand controls this is a business requirement and not a state or federal requirement this means medicare does not cover the expense as i learn more , i will be adding to my list of considerations and options considering this is a major investment depending upon options , it could add another , to the price of the vehicle , i need to do my homework ahead of time can you think of anything else that needs to be added to this list ?