there is a question i am often asked and one that i continue to struggle with because i am not sure there is one right answer i believe there are far too many dependencies to say what , when and how the question when should i tell my daughter or son that he she possibly has the defective gene ? in my opinion , there is no particular age that anyone is fully ready to hear this news i believe a parent should wait until symptoms appear in the case of a son , or if a son or daughter start discussing having children with their spouse , or if a treatment is made available and the earlier a patient begins treatment the slower the progression prior to that , what is the value of discussing this issue ? it will not change anything and will probably just make the son or daughter worry about something needlessly once you think you have the above answer , you next have to tackle , how much should i tell them ? what level of detail is important at this time ? should i really get into the disease or just provide an overview and be ready to address additional concerns ? also , it is important to consider how your daughter or son might receive the information maturity level from there you can drive yourself crazy with other questions including do i say possibly or a chance even if you are certain they carry the mutated gene ? should i provide additional reading material on kennedy s disease or sit with them as they search the internet for information and answers ? should i discuss my pending conversation with a genetics counselor asking for guidance as to the best way to explain the situation ? or , do i break the news while we are both sitting in front of a counselor ? should i recommend testing or have them wait until they want to know for certain ? if they do decide to be tested , how will this information impact their health insurance and employment now and in the future ? if they son or daughter plan on having children , do i provide information on prenatal testing or schedule an appointment with a genetics counselor ? the above are just some starter questions i am sure there are more and perhaps some that are more important as a parent or potential parent , your opinion on this important subject is important let other readers know your perspective and reasoning it just might help others when they wrestle with these questions