over the last years i have progressively gained a lot of weight small bigger and bigger i have gained well over a pounds at last count it was pounds about pounds per year quite honestly ? i needed the first ! i went from a size depending on the designer to a size never should have gone below i never had the body type to be a size at ' it is not healthy to be pounds unless you got this unusual and very rare body type that calista flockhart or shania twain have according to bmi , a person that height should be a size , especially if they have natural hips , butt and boobs ! i do n't think anyone over feet should even think of being a size my heart rate went from about bpm to bpm i used to be able to climb flights of stairs no problem to barely making it up over the last years my stress level has progressively gone up , my health , my son 's health , finances , betrayals i also quit smoking and years ago yeah me ! ! ! i have off and on taken the following combination of drugs valproic acid , seroquel and paxil and lyrica the fibro and cfs have gotten much worst stress , what can you do ? massively reducing my activity level the main two reasons i have gained weight is because i exercise less and eat more i still move as much as my body lets me and i make a conscious effort to eat healthier , but i admit i still exceed i do not however feel that i exceed to the extent of pounds per year ! why else have i gained so much weight ? i hear starving yourself slows the metabolic rate that only accounts for maybe the first year where i was trying to beat the bulimia and eat normally i hear quitting smoking also reduces the metabolic rate well that counted for about months or so after i quit smoking my drugs ? maybe , let s look at the side effects of each valproic acid common side effects are dyspepsia and or weight gain less common are fatigue , peripheral edema , acne , dizziness , drowsiness , hair loss , headaches , nausea , sedation and tremors seroquel the most common side effect of quetiapine is somnolence other common side effects include sluggishness , fatigue , dry mouth , sore throat , dizziness , abdominal pain , constipation , upset stomach , orthostatic hypotension , inflammation or swelling of the sinuses or pharynx , increased appetite , and weight gain paxil paroxetine is associated with clinically significant weight gain lyrica common blurred vision , diplopia , increased appetite , euphoria , confusion , vivid dreams , changes in libido increase or decrease , irritability , ataxia , attention changes , abnormal coordination , memory impairment , tremors , dysarthria , parasthesia , vertigo , dry mouth and constipation , vomiting and flatulence , erectile dysfunction , fatigue , peripheral edema , drunkenness , abnormal walking , weight gain yup no reason to think that by taking all of these together that it might have affected my weight in any way no i am not saying the drugs , quitting smoking and starving myself previously are the only reasons i am fat , what i am saying is that with the activity reduction that they did not help me control my weight actually when i stopped smoking i was on a very restrictive diet and walked more and still gained weight hello ! i hate being fat i hate it for a variety of reasons someone told me i should eat less than calories and there is no reason i should be fat i do n't know how to lose weight the right way anymore well i know how , but within my abilities thanks for reading !