you know this place , as my first post explains , is supposed to be a place where i can let loose but this is a public forum , all kinds of people will probably wind up reading these things that i write , even people i know ! it looks like that means that i will need to start censuring what i say or does it ? i ca n't afford therapy , and the waiting list for those less expensive help places have waiting lists coming out the whazoo i also have a really hard time being accepted to those services add to that , all the therapists i have seen thus far have not been very helpful they ca n't even touch the tip of the iceberg that is me , they totally bungle all attempts and in many cases , have done more harm than good what good is a therapist if they ca n't get their patient to open up ? i have a laundry list of issues , some are probably joined at the hip , a few may have the same source , in some cases , the problem may be more chemical that psychological i created this blog to try and release my inner demons , and sometimes that might mean saying things that may offend keeping everything in is just not working for me i have a very low tolerance level for a lot of things i realize i need to work on that and ca n't just use it as an excuse , but it needs to come out ! so do i need to censure myself if i share a story about one of my readers ? i do n't plan on naming names just this one person did this or said that if i do n't give a name , or an address , is it still slander ? do i need to be muzzled again ? if i write about something that annoyed me , like i ask a question and the person who responds to me probably did n't get the question right because their answer was totally off base , will that be going too far ? heavens knows it does n't take much to send me on a rant sometimes if that person happens to read my blog and recognize themselves , will they get mortally insulted or maybe learn a lesson ? how would i feel if the roles were reversed ? how would i feel ? good question ! well i guess how i would feel would all depend on the circumstance have i been forewarned that i may be ridiculed online ? if i was i have a few choices not do anything that may cause me to be ridiculed ok that is impossible ! something always invariably happens , something stupid will come out of my mouth without warning , and to top it off , i am not the most regular person out there , so that is not going to happen however i could choose to be a little more careful about the things i do or say ask the person to not write about me no ! ! ! as much as i would like to do that , i do n't think it 's good to muzzle people it hurts them on such a deep and basic level that i could not do that if they need to say mean things about me , i may not like it , but it 's something that i would have to deal with hopefully it 's warranted and i may learn something from the whole thing i could simply choose not to read it if i have a good relationship with the blogger i could ask the blogger to tell me when there is a post about me , that way i can choose to read it or not if i choose to read it , no matter what is written there , i cannot get all huffy about it if i disagree , i can respectfully choose to discuss it with the blogger or just learn to live with it what if i was not forewarned ? well the same three choices above apply right ? sure there is the option of being hurt and insulted if it happens to me i may do those two things as well i think that part of me will have to accept that negatives things will be said and thought about me in any forum , and all of them are public in one way or another so i will not censure myself , i will share what i think and feel i will try to not name names , or give too much distinctive information that everyone can figure out but i will rant and rave about the things that spark me thanks for reading ! feel free to comment i fixed the comment options