hey guys , guess what ! ! ! ! almost hallowe'en , my most favoritest day of the year ! ! ! ! ! for most of my adult life , i have wanted to make my house into a haunted house but that means a whole bunch of strangers trampling through your house that also means a lot of cleaning , before and after i hate cleaning so probably not going to have a haunted house any time soon but i do a scary front yard ! only been able to do a scary front yard since oh about , and still we slowly had to build it as we did not have a lot of decorations the first two years but even those first two years , the children and parents enjoyed also , keep in mind i live in a town home , the front yard is not that huge , but it will still have tombstones , bones , skeleton , ghouls , a body part or two , spider webs , strobe lights , fog , eerie sounds and carved pumpkins remind me to add a picture once the decorations are done , mind you at night , with the strobe lights and fog , it would be better , but pictures are not always very good at night with strobe lights , maybe a video daughter arranging the spider webs trying to escape to safety we will be dressed except my son who will be out trick or treating in scary costumes speaking of costumes , i have recently tried to remember all the costumes my kids have had over the years my daughter was a foetus born days later lol red riding hood made the cape myself from some scrap fabric my neighbour had given me a scarecrow made myself from nd hand clothes and scraps of fabric , got lots of compliments , i so wish i had a picture a black and white puppy with face painting hand made costume given to me a white and blue clown my daughter was glenda wizard of oz fairy that i made myself daughter was sailor moon , son was banana in pajama i was the crow daughter batman ? son ? daughter squaw son a bear daughter purple witch , son clown costume recycled daughter purple witch son puppy costume his sister wore daughter ? ? son ? ? daughter baby son a devil daughter geisha son a dinosaur daughter pink fairy son a dementor me , witch cancelled daughter witch , son a female rock star me , devild 's mistress daughter shaman son the love guru daughter witch son murderous clown daughter a goth fairy son neo from the matrix me an evil jester we did skip halloween for two years , one where i cancelled hallowe'en as a result of the kids pushing their luck too far behaviour wise they never thought i would do it another year our finances would not let us , but i think we still had costumes for the year we have also become quite creative with our pumpkin carving , it 's unfortunate that halloween falls on a monday this year but we should be able to have fun none the less , we are having a small decorating get together well i 'll try to remember to let you all know how it turns out thanks for reading !