getting our boarding passes first flight en route to ukraine ! the following pics were taken in kyiv motherland statue beautiful ! us with the trumps , another american family adopting and now on to ochtyrka , the town close to sergei 's orphanage our first day reunited with sergei brad challenging sergei to pull ups the school at the orphanage this is what many of the buildings in ochtyrka looked like the scenery we enjoyed on our trip to the orphanage each day pronounced ochtyrka swimming in the river giving tattoos to the boys brad with sergei and his best friend sergei old churches in ochtyrka the favorite pastime our taxi driver , sergei spent alot of time doing this the older boys were constantly challenging brad to physical competitions ivan a great , funny kid ! sergei took this photo thought the angle was artsy like it so i posted it bacon anyone ? they grow the crayfish big in ukraine ! we were soooo excited to find lay 's potato chips ! saw a lot of this boys running around in their undies lunch with some of the mission team members dancing with vica at the carnival we had yes , that is brad andriy for sure a cutie ! brad with natasha , my favorite little girl there painting faces brad with some of the mission team members bible lesson time ukrainian cookout they cook bread dough on sticks over an open fire it was quite yummy this is seriously how they get baths in the river me with nastya denis what an awesome boy ! natasha again i could always count on her for some snuggling and kisses ! such a sweetie ! team pictures me and another vica brad with some of the older boys he befriended last few minutes at the orphanage sergei with some of his friends the two sergei 's sumy bound sunflowers everywhere ! ! bumper cars in sumy relaxing by the pool at our lovely hotel what a happy face ! love it ! mcdonald 's in sumy tasted great after weeks of barely eating anything ! back to kyiv to finish it up breakdancing in kyiv cheryl trump and i we were so blessed to be in kyiv with them again for the end of our trips we even got to fly out of ukraine together me , sergei , tatiana , and cheryl souvenir lane dinner at an authentic ukranian restaurant really yummy food ! hope you all enjoyed the pics i know there were a ton of them , but these were n't even the tip of the iceburg we took over pics ! crazy ! ca n't wait to get them made into photobooks i'm making one for our family and one for sergei to have