hey friends ! no baby yet i 'll just get that right out of the way i will tell you i had my delicious friendly 's reese 's peanut butter cup sundae last night and damn was it good i will have sexy dreams about it for a while now but , i'm getting off the point of this message to give you the latest news from the docs i 've made no progress ! woo ! i 'll put my sarcasm on hold to say that all my stats are the same as last week no dilation tightly closed according to this doctor , effaced , and head kind of high poo happily , the baby 's movement has been crazy today and her heartrate was fab i'm so glad , because on tuesday i 'd had contractions for over hours and many were painful , but it was false labor and during the whole day she almost never moved just as i was about to go to bed , she finally did several jig like dances in there which made me feel much better she moved more yesterday , and now today she 's like a party animal one less thing to worry about ! the doctor told me i will go in for my next nst on monday and they will check me out if i 've made some progress , they will plan to induce me on friday morning of next week if not , i will go in next thursday afternoon and they will insert cervadil a string they insert that has medication to get things started and i 'll sleep the night there , then have my induction on friday morning after some breakfast so , if little p does n't make her own appearance before then , it looks like friday may st will be the day we get things started ! i hope she 's born that day too , but i know anything can happen and , i had previously picked may st to be the birth day my guess in the family little p 's birth day pool so obviously i want to win and that is clearly a huge priority i swear i did n't fix the game the doctor told me the days this was to happen and i nodded because i 'll do anything to get her out and safely there was no mention of a pool or anything i swear ! if i 'd had a choice i would have screamed get this shit going today ! i 'll keep you all posted if things change , though one more week ! ! ! save you might also like it 's getting interesting mother 's day and the birth noah 's birth linkwithin