a little while ago , chris and i were watching my new obsession holmes on homes on hgtv i think that 's the network it 's on ? anyway , if you have n't seen it , it 's basically this canadian guy named mike holmes who is a contractor builder who wears these overalls over a white tank top he 's all muscular and tan he reminds me of paul bunyan without the ox as he swoops in and saves people from contractor nightmares for example , a couple spent , on a new bathroom remodel and then the shower was leaking and the ceiling was molding , paint was peeling come to find out that everything was installed improperly leading to water leaking into their walls , floors , to the rooms below , etc so , holmes comes in and fixes it all for them and saves the day there are all kinds of episodes of different nightmares and he makes everyone so happy i love it one episode , he said , we can clean all the crap out of there and start over or something like that but they blanked out the word crap i looked at chris and said hey ! they just bleeped the word crap ! that 's weird ? since when ca n't you say that word ? ? he casually looked over at me and said it 's a swear and i was shocked no it is n't ! i cried ! he told me well , in my house growing up it was considered a bad word not the kind where your mouth got washed out with soap , but enough to make my mom say hey ! watch your mouth ! i sat and thought about this for a minute , shocked and then i said i 've always said crap ! it 's my go to word ! ? i had no idea it was seen as bad ? my brain raced to think about the million times i 've said that very word in front of his mother but i 've said many worse words tossed casually around so i guess it 's a wash he then says i know i guess he 'd noticed my million mentions of the word around his mom too so i then countered with , well , in our house we could say crap we were n't supposed to say the f word or the sh word and damn and friggin' were the ones that would warrant a watch your language from mom but crap was always ok i guess crap was on the friggin' and damn list in his house so , i called my father dad , chris says that 'crap' is a pseudo swear you could n't say it in his house without a firm talking to what 's the deal ? he was surprised himself and thought for a minute then he said well , i always say , can you say it in school ? i replied yes , i 'd said it in school a lot and never got punished there you go , he said you may not learn a lot of crap but you can say it ! or something to that effect still , i 've decided i need to curb my horrid language , especially now that little p is here and she 's a listenin' the word shazbot has been flying around quite a bit is that one ok ? if mork from mork and mindy could say it , it must be ok ? and just because , here is a cute photo of paige from the day before easter when we were at my sister in law 's house for easter dinner she 's holding a plastic corn do n't worry , she did n't eat it have a great day ! save you might also like the soothsayer mother 's day and the birth before and now linkwithin