hi ! so , over the weekend chris gave me some time , so i ran to get a manicure get the old gel one removed and a regular one done instead at a new place the person doing my nails once i sat down said so ! when are you due ? cue the debbie downer music the air fizzled right out of me i did n't want her to feel bad , so i smiled and said oh , no no no , i had the baby months ago i still have a belly that has n't really gone down yet my belly was mostly gone by now with paige , but this time around my stomach was bigger and i continue to look or months pregnant i sometimes use a post partum belly support and sometimes i use spanx that day i was brave to go without , or so i thought ! lol anyway , here are some questions you just do n't ask when are you due ? or are you pregnant ? just do n't ask unless the other person has brought it up first or , if you are in the delivery room and the baby is flying out of her deal at that moment also , asking if someone is pregnant is asking them to deliver info they might not be ready to deliver yet or they may not be pregnant and you make them feel bad about having a big lunch soooo ! when are you guys having kids ? or sooooo ! you must be next to have a baby ! etc this is personal so many people are having issues with conceiving and it 's a very difficult time you never know who is having these troubles and that question can cause stress and tears take it from me just do n't ask and , some people do n't want children and do n't want to have to explain themselves it 's an invasive question that leads us to when are you two getting married ? mind your own business ! and do n't make the happy couple feel all awkward and weird he 'll propose if he 's darn well ready leave them alone already ! and if they plan to break up , well , that 's their business too when are you gonna have baby number two ? ugh some people only want one kid or , sometimes people have an impossible time conceiving a second child or , some are actively trying and do n't want to share do n't ask , unless you are a close friend and are already in the private loop what other questions do you find invasive ? and just because you visited today , here 's a fun photo save you might also like of measure do n't you just hate it when months old ! linkwithin