phew ! i 've just finished updating all of my history of losses here so that you can be caught up to where i am now pregnant and starting a new day weeks pregnant i have a lot to say about things so far , but i 'll keep this post easy and tell you about the discovery of this pregnancy after my miscarriage in july , i refused to bother to wait a cycle in between i 'd been through it enough to know that i just wanted to try again right away i never did get a period in between ! i knew when i 'd ovulated thanks to those handy ovulation predictor kits the week after i 'd ovulated found me drowning in depression i was so consumed with sadness over my losses and was really starting to feel like i was losing it i cried a lot i got angry a lot i was telling myself it probably would n't happen for us , so it was time to deal with my grief and also consider adoption as our next step i found myself yelling and snapping at chris over nothing i found myself fuming over simple things i felt so resentful of everyone around me my good friend sue worked with me to conclude i needed to find a grief counselor who could help me through my moodiness and sadness the next morning found me at dpo days past ovulation and i decided to take a pregnancy test why ? because i could n't wait to be late for my period i have no patience that , the moodiness , and the pain in my boobs and uterus urged me to just pee on a stick and get it over with well , a line started to appear almost right away on the test i thought my eyes were playing tricks on me , so i looked away , annoyed with myself for imagining things like this seconds later , i peered back at it and saw it was getting darker my heart jumped into my throat as i rubbed my eyes a mirage ? my brain hallucinating ? nope the distinct line formed and was there i did n't need the light of a thousand suns to see it i did n't need to squint or hold it at a hundred different angles in different lighting i did n't even need to take it apart yes , i sheepishly admit i have done all those things every month of trying to conceive do n't judge me ! i know many of you do it too ! anyway , i could see it on the test over a foot away on the counter without trickery i 'd never had a line come so early dpo or so strong ! usually it came on dpo and was so faint i needed special nasa equipment to conjure it i did a jig in the bathroom with maren dancing at my feet we did it ! my excitement gripped my throat as i realized this is just step one will this last ? will this baby live ? the fear engulfed me in its stench i could n't even truly enjoy this moment without clouding it with my worry anyhoo , i went on to have my first beta hcg blood draw at the doctor the pregnancy hormone in your blood that they can measure the result ? hcg and my progesterone was great at i was n't thrilled with the , but i knew it was early being that the hcg should at least double every days , i went back in days later for the follow up i prayed for it to be around and it came in at hcg ! ! ! ! ! ! this was practically the quickest doubling time i 'd ever had two days later i went in for the rd beta hcg draw ! there i was hoping for at least and it was way more than that this all explained my severe mood swings i had hormones swirling through me like never before this is when i knew this baby has a good chance ! and that is what happened during my th week of pregnancy up next the first ultrasounds and is it in the right place ? save you might also like it 's getting interesting noah 's birth reflecting linkwithin