the baby poo gets everywhere ? oh yes it 's the kind of story that 's always funny later , but when it 's happening you 're all holy shit ! it 's effing everywhere ! somebody help meeee ! then you wish you could hit a button that takes you to a warm and sunny tropical place with a nice drink serenity now ! and then zings you back once you feel relaxed anyway , i 've heard tons of poo stories in my day one where my brother , when he was a wee baby , decided to take his poo filled diaper off and explore it with his hands during a productive nap time and then it got all in his hair , himself , all over the crib , the walls , etc etc my poor mother knew something was up due to the smell coming from the room and walked in to the massacre most people have tales like this i'm dreading having one to tell of my own there are other tales of potty training when the little one takes off the diaper to be free of its shackles and then promptly crouches down to make a neat pile on the welcome mat , rug , or other snazzy surface i 've managed to keep the poo problems to a minimum until this morning when little p decided it was time to do a giant gift for me in her diaper i stuck her on her changing pad and forgot to give her the little toy that usually distracts her once i got the diaper off , the mess was bigger than i 'd planned what 's new ? and she promptly stuck her hand down there into the fray agh ! no ! ! i barked and grabbed her hand before it could touch her mouth or anything else i got it just in time , but it was all in her hand , you know ? hands have a lot of nooks ick so , while i was frantically wiping her hand and gagging , she decided to flail her little legs around and both socked feet bumped up in to the fray too so , i had to rip the socks off her feet , stat now , there was poo all over the changing pad because she was wiggling like a worm on a hook anyhoo , it all got cleaned up eventually just lots of clothes , items , and myself were victim to the skirmish now , of course , i'm paranoid about the next poo i'm such a lightweight about the whole issue many friends call me a wuss but i say , hey , do n't tell me you get poo all over your hands and all over the place and that you do n't freak out just a little save you might also like months old ! before and now thank you linkwithin