hello ! welcome to a new week ! i hope you had a good weekend ours was nice we had errands and we kept plenty busy friday night we went to dinner at a local family place and had a nice time woot ! saturday paige and chris went to their first day at little gym where paige tried a gymnastics class and loved it i guess she cried when it was time to go but , when she got home i did a hard hitting interview with her that afternoon , noah decided to not nap and screamed for a few hours i carried him around and rocked him to no avail i finally gave up and let him just crawl around the living room in his sleep sack sigh later that evening , we discovered that our house is haunted just in time for halloween ! please disregard the crazy mess that is the kitchen island it 's an endless task it 's scary in itself things fell apart not long after we caught the ghost on video and everyone was crying and freaking out over something or other finally , bedtime came and there was much rejoicing first , we said we 'd barf if we heard one more fuss from a kiddo then we watched the avengers and i thought it sucked parts of it made me giggle but , i got to sit with chris alone and actually watch a movie despite us running upstairs to help noah every time he woke up screaming for whatever reason and sunday found us going to the mall which paige seems to love i used to hate the mall as a kid paige ca n't get enough see her happy little gallop ? she kept asking if we were going to go to lots and lots of stores in a hopeful way as if she were scared we were going to make her leave the precious mall that very minute she loves anthropologie just like me we fawned over the hair clips for a while and she loved touching everything and saying this is bea uuuu tiful ! ! we also ate at p f changs and made it through a fuss free meal for the most part noah enjoyed a tasty plate of plate mmmm paige ate dumplings and colored after a bunch of shopping around we had a smoothie break where paige decided we should share my drink but she pretty much stole it like the thief she is to her credit , she let me take sips of the drink that was supposed to be hers hmph noah just sat there and played with his paci he 's a trooper we got home in time for dinner , but paige sat there and whined , fussed , and moaned about everything without eating a bite until i said one more fuss and you 're going to bed no dinner she kept on going , so off to bed she went she was n't hungry so , her dinner is now going to be tomorrow 's lunch there was much crying and yelling , but she admitted she wanted to go to bed i tell ya , i can only take so much fussing and moaning aaaggghh ! here 's to a new week ! and less fussing , darnit ! save