hello everyone ! happy friday ! i 've actually been feeling ok this week no queasiness like before i'm just crazily tired to demonstrate this , i went to bed last night promptly at in the evening i 've even managed to shock myself with that one ! i was going about my business and i started to almost fall asleep while i was eating dinner i had this urgent need to just get into bed dammit ! and hurry ! i obliged and after hours of sleeping i am awake and ready for a new day supposedly in the meantime , i noticed that i have a little pouch finally ! usually when i wake up my stomach is pretty flat and as the day wears on i get all bloated and belly rific yesterday , i woke up and when i glanced in the mirror at my side view yes , i check each morning do n't judge me ! i noticed a bit of a bulge pouch taking shape only i would notice it , but i swear it is there i also noticed that the jeans i could button the day before could no longer button or zip scientific proof ! i realized the other morning , when i was getting dressed for bob 's funeral , that most of my pants no longer fit i 'd sort of figured i could wear them , but just leave them unzipped and unbuttoned but wear a stretch band across the top that hides that fact a long shirt to hide it all and voila ! but , my plans were foiled when i pulled on each pair of pants to find that my thighs were so squished into them that they looked painted on they were so tight up there that i was giving off an impression i just did n't want to give ! so much for the just unbutton the pants theory i'm sure bob would n't truly care that i looked like a bag lady at his service , but i was starting to panic in the end , i luckily found one pair of pants that still worked in the thighs and off i went this little exercise made me realize that while it 's fine to wear sweats and pajamas at home during the day , you ca n't really go into the real world like that i scurried off to the mall yesterday and found a pair of maternity cordouroy pants that are like heaven to wear now , at least i can leave the house and not look like a hobo i am at the interesting in between stage where i do n't look pregnant yet but a lot of my clothes are n't fitting right yet i'm too cheap to just buy clothes a size larger that i 'll only have for a few weeks perhaps if i become a temporary hermit , i can spend the next month in the house wearing only jammies and then emerge as a fully blossomed pregnant woman come december it 's a little howard hughes but it just might work i promise i wo n't pee in any jars save you might also like weeks it 's getting interesting mother 's day and the birth linkwithin