it 's been a while since i 've done one of these ! winter was blah and to be honest , i wore my pajamas almost every day i just could n't get out of my own way ! now that the better weather is here , i'm going to try and make a better effort again ! play along with us all here here i am in my casual outfit for running around all day after a month old toddler nothing earth shattering , but it 's a new shirt from anthropologie that i love it 's loose , comfy and hides my tummy pouch score ! see how i'm casually holding a rusty watering can ? i wanted to look rustic for you p s i do n't garden hence the rust on the aforementioned watering can and now that my latest mom outfit has been displayed , i must tell you this waking up at in the morning to see your little child standing silently and staring at you from feet away is terrifying i startled awake from a deep sleep and saw this figure in the curtain it was a solid mass and was just staring at me paigie ? i whispered no answer paige ! i whispered more purposefully this time still no answer then i shut my eyes and thought to myself what if the ghost from that haunted restaurant we ate at earlier attached itself to me and followed me home ? ? ! ! ! ! do n't make fun of me i was still foggy from sleep ! i 've seen a lot of ghost hunters and haunted collector episodes in my day perhaps not a good idea ? anyway , i ended up reaching out and paige finally moved toward me and mumbled something about not being able to find one of her billion lovies in her bed phew ! relieved it was n't a ghost , i got out of bed and helped her locate the missing lovie it was right next to her pillow all along , dammit ! i 've had friends tell me similar stories in the past and i always wondered why it would be so scary to have your child wake you up at night now i get it i just need to remember that here , am is not dead time but missing lovie pain in the arse time and for no real reason , here is a quick sketch i did in my book the other day a little sloth ! save