hi friends ! i'm back today with the latest info from my doc and a belly pic it 's much less torpedo than yesterday big , but not jutting out like a missile maybe later after snacks and a nice dinner ? so , i'm not dilated at all oh well but , she mentioned that my cervix is effaced so that 's something , right ? she said the baby 's head is higher up at a station not exactly engaged but it 's still early so we shall see what pans out ! she told me that due to the vessel cord , they will not allow me to go past my due date thank you god ! and that if they need to induce , they will do it closer to the due date to make good use of the ripened cervix of course , all will change if she finds the head still has n't engaged later on this could be due to many things , like my t shaped uterus or if the baby is extra big but , again , it 's a wait and see game i guess my next check will be next thursday in the meantime , i take comfort in knowing there is days left until my due date and i will not go past that and could go earlier ! i can do it ! today 's exam was my first cervix check of this pregnancy and holy ck did it hurt ! i knew it would be uncomfortable but geez ! i 've also developed a nice case of carpal tunnel syndrome pregnancy related in my left hand i have n't felt anything in my left index or middle fingers for weeks now i guess it 's due to the swelling of fluid in my arm that is pressing the nerves she assured me it would likely go away about a week or so after giving birth it 's a good thing i do n't use my left hand for any sort of detailed handiwork like disarming bombs or performing heart surgery it 's a good thing i do n't work for jack bauer for after a huge explosion i would have to explain sorry jack , it 's this darned pregnancy induced carpal tunnel ! it 's a real bitch ! i hope that building did n't house important documents or hostages you needed so that 's the latest update ! while i wait to give birth i still have lots of little things going on to keep me busy i 've got a few wedding clients left where i'm wrapping things up programs , menus , and the like i 've got to pack little p 's bag for the hospital oh yeah , and my own i'm sort of procrastinating on that because i figure what do i really need besides a few toiletries , a robe , and a coming home ensemble ? the hospital provides most of what is needed and when i find i'm out of things to do , i glue liners into the birth announcement envelopes i 'll be using might as well do what i can while i have the time ! is n't my life riveting ? alrighty folks , i'm off to do more wedding work and perhaps some cleaning and we wait ! save you might also like weeks weeks weeks pregnant linkwithin