hi friends ! we finally finished up with paige 's new big girl room ! phew ! we took all the elements that were in her nursery and transferred them over to this new space and changed up the bed , dresser , and bookcase her nursery furniture and old room now will belong to baby n we 're working on his room now ! as you can see , we added a nightstand ikea and added seagrass wallpaper to the front of the drawers to add a little something extra to the look just like we 'd done with paige 's dresser in her nursery the bamboo wooden mobile is from petit collage the owl print on canvas is also from petit collage not sure if they are selling it anymore , but they have lots of great choices for wall art ! the curtains in the yellow chevron pattern were from windows by melissa she was super friendly and easy to work with ! the butterflies over the bed are removable and can be taken off and put back on over and over and over again so easy ! i love them they came from love mae on etsy there 's tons of product and great decals and ideas there i even got paige a cool paper doll decal from there it 's currently on the wall in my living room the letters came from michael 's craft store they came in white , so i spray painted them yellow gloss easy ! the rug is from her nursery it had come from crate and barrel back in it 's a simple cream shag in size x feet p needs a little step stool to get into the bed so we found a white one that has a lid that lifts for storage at buy buy baby her toddler bedrails also came from there paige 's book nook is my favorite part of the room her yellow chair is a slipcover custom made by calico corners the chair is really a pea green velvet number i found at the salvation army store for bucks when i was in my early twenties the hooray banner came from the shop called nice on etsy i love it ! it 's how we felt in bringing paige into the world the fabric hoops fabric came from purl soho and the hoops came from joanne fabrics the bookcase came from ikea and i painted the back wall of it yellow it got all scraped up , so i would probably line it with paper once it 's all put together if i were to do it over again the lampshades all came from anthropologie back in the dachshund lamp was found at modern nursery the kitchen towel draped on the back of the chair is from anthropologie circa early the pillow on the chair came from west elm in it was meant for our bedroom , but paige kept bringing into her room again and again so i just leave it there now ha ! we put paige 's little doll bed next to her own bed for now she 's still not really into playing with dolls yet the doll bed was a steal from ikea the blanket was crocheted by my dear friend 's mother for paige when she was born the bed and dresser came from our local huge furniture chain called jordan 's furniture it was on sale as it was to be discontinued i loved the scallop detail on both the bed and the dresser the elephant hamper came from home decorator 's collection it 's the medium sized one in the color honey the stuffed owl came from modern nursery you can see i store p 's changing pad in the nook next to the dresser and wall when i need to change her potty training just ca n't happen right now i throw the pad on the bed and go about our business the print above the dresser came from the esteemed erin stead , winner of the caldecott medal for her illustrations in the book a sick day for amos mcgee for anyone that does n't know that medal is basically the best picture oscar for illustrators does n't get bigger ! that book is a huge favorite around here and these illustrations are my favorite from any book by far she has offered a very limited selection of prints from the book for sale and i jumped at it i had it framed at michael 's craft store paige chose the print she wanted and she loves it i like that it 's a real piece of art that holds monetary value as well as memories read more about erin stead this was the first book she 's ever illustrated ! ! ! ! and her story here i 'd be remiss if i did n't include a picture of paige 's beloved wooden train handmade , here ! i would also be remiss if i did n't show p 's real closet inside with no picking up there 's a drawer thingie for her socks , medical stuff , hair stuff and whatnot and there 's a bigger drawer thingie all from bed bath beyond to hold some toys it makes cleanup easy for her i certainly wo n't do it for her ! ! i hope you enjoyed your tour and that you like her space ! i love playing in there with her it 's cozy and happy , and most important of all she loves it ! save