hi friends ! my aunt pat sent me some awesome baby shower pictures she took , so i picked out a few to show you and give you and idea of what it was like these were taken when i was just starting week of my pregnancy and i'm now at week anyhoo here is how the tables were set up , what the cake and favors looked like i 've blurred out little p 's name on the cake so you ca n't see yet the little cookies were the favors and there were delicious frosted versions shaped like onesies i loved them ! as you can see , the cake is in the shape of a baby carriage here is the gift pile and a section of the gifts my friends and family were way too generous we are so lucky to have them all in our lives little p is one lucky baby ! she now has everything she needs for day to day life and fun ! mmm the buffet drool here i am loading up my plate the food was very delicious and quite a selection ! here is my mother and myself thanks for throwing the shower mom ! and there is my great friend sue and myself thanks for helping to throw the shower and for doing so much to organize it sue ! here are some gift opening moments the oriole 's onesie is a little something she can wear for when chris wants to watch the baseball games he 's a big fan and was delighted to see this when i showed him here i am crying as i open this willow figurine depicting a mom , dad , and a newborn baby a friend of mine had given us a willow figure at christmas time of a pregnant woman and here is the version with the father and baby with that same woman i burst right into tears when i saw this i managed to say it 's a family ! when i held it up oh , now i'm crying again my aunt pat and cousin jennifer gave me this pink bathtub filled with baby products , toys , and the like it was stuffed ! and when i got toward the end bottom , my aunt sat next to me and showed me how to take the clothes out one by one , each article of clothing zig zagged out of the bathtub and i quickly noticed they were attached with clothespins ! it took several people to help unravel it and by the time it was done stretching out well , it went clear across the entire banquet room ! what a fun idea ! it was a neat presentation and was fun to be able to see all the little outfits at once the photo only shows my little end , but you get the idea it was so cool ! thank you again to my family and friends who came all the way out to celebrate with us you were way too generous with your gifts , time , and efforts we are so grateful for everything and it was so special to me that you could be there i always wondered if i would ever have a baby after all we went through , and the day of little p s baby shower was such a special and important milestone for me my heart overflows save