hi friends ! i 'd promised to do a post about some of my favorite baby products we 've used the things we 've found to be essential in the care of our little ones because it 's just me here all day , i do n't have a chance to gather photos of each thing i'm sorry for that but , i figure a list is better than nothing ! some sort of stroller with little p we used an orbit stroller and car seat combo we loved it ! ! but , the bucket seat is extremely heavy nonetheless , we loved it and it even glided through the sand at the beach no problem now , we are using a joovy caboose it 's a stroller and a half where it fits noah 's bucket seat a borrowed graco easyride and has a place for paige to stand in back she may also choose to use the little seat it has it seems uncomfortable for her , but she always likes to sit and does n't seem to mind i like that paige has the option to ride as well , but the stroller is n't as large as a double stroller it 's so easy to open and close too but , i 've found it does n't glide through the sand at our local beach pond as easily ca n't have it all ! baby carrier i love the ergo baby carrier you can choose to hold baby to the front , hip , or back the down side is that it really is more convenient when the baby is months old and up so his hips can go to either side of the carrier there 's a way for him to ride inside at a younger age if you use an infant insert this option has worked out fine , but i prefer to use the baby bjorn for these early months it 's just easier to get him in and out at this size so , we 'll use this until he gets much bigger , then it will be the ergo crib neither kiddo used a bassinet or anything else the first night was all about the crib and learning that this is where sleep happens it 's worked out great ! baby monitor if you have a larger house and feel the need , we love our sony mhz babycall nursery monitor with receivers it 's not a video monitor i do n't need more to obsess over and the sound is crystal clear it 's never had any problem with reception and is never fuzzy sounding we keep one receiver downstairs so we can listen in the evenings , and one stays in our bedroom sound machine we live within decent earshot of a freight train that has a different daily schedule day or night , i do n't need it waking up the kiddos so , they each sleep with white noise we love the brookstone tranquil moments sound machine for baby the quality is absolute and the sound options are great there 's even a mother 's heartbeat and a car option ! miracle blanket i did n't use one with paige until her week fussies set in it made all the difference and saved our lives we used them with noah from the start and he 's never had problems with night time fussiness and he is sleeping through the night now at under months old he naps well too i would say that having is a good number one to wash and a backup in case of spit ups or blow outs never want to be caught without ! bouncy seat with vibration you need a place to lay the baby , and perhaps a place that has little toys when the baby is older and more interested i like the soothing vibration option from time to time some babies love it , some do n't they even make small swings that also vibrate and act as a bouncy seat in a small footprint ! great for having all the options when you are n't sure what baby will prefer a place for tummy time we use a fisher price rainforest theme playmat gym paige loved it and still does at almost ! she fights noah for it lol ! noah likes to lay there and do his tummy time and flip over to look at the toys it 's a nice place for entertaining bottles we use the dr brown brand less gas , more parts to clean , but overall we 've loved them high chair we love the graco blossom in high chair it serves you from the infant months all the way through to the young child years it even comes apart to be a travel chair ! paige is currently using the booster portion , but we can still rig up the high chair portion for noah when he 's ready great if you have a roomy kitchen and plans for more than one child if not , we like the phil ted clip on chair it 's easy to use , you can take it with you everywhere love it at restaurants ! and you can throw it in the wash part of me is considering just using this option for noah , but we 'll see what happens so , these have been our essentials do n't forget to add a crap load of bibs and kitchen towel sized burp cloths or larger ! we like to use those little receiving blankets and you 're good to go ! i 'll do my next post about my favorite baby care books i 've read a ton and have it narrowed down to my favorites that i still look at again and again and would recommend to every new parent or expecting parent save you might also like a miracle ! activities the first purchase linkwithin