dear little p , you turned last weekend ! happy birthday ! i ca n't believe how fast the time has gone it feels like you just turned ! we had a super fun party for you again , like last year , at jam time you invited a few friends from school and we had lots of friends and family come by watching you laugh and smile and run with such vigor with your buddies was a huge gift for us my heart was melting all day long here 's your new stuffed alligator that used to be grammie 's when she was a kid ! paige , you have turned into such a spirited and sprightly little lady this year when you were a baby , i always wondered what you would be like i was so curious about your personality and what your quirks might be here are some things about you you love to make up your own songs and change the words to existing songs you make clever jokes and laugh after you tell them you still love to be held yay ! you fall out of your chair a lot you love to make yourself fake laugh and then sigh after all to make your mama laugh you ca n't say your th sound , so you replace it with f and v and d for example , you like to say i was free instead of three or let 's play togever ! instead of together or it 's over dere instead of there it 's cute the speech person at school says it 's age appropriate and not to worry ! you like to blow bubbles in your milk and sing i love bubbles ! ! ! as loud as you can you sleep with , like , a hundred stuffed animals and objects in your bed you like to announce your feelings when you 're sad or mad you 'll say i'm feeling a little bit sad right now , i need you to hold me or you 'll say mama , i'm feeling very upset right now i'm getting a little bit mad ! usually it 's after i do n't let you watch a show or make you eat more supper you 've started to read to us at bedtime either daddy or me will read you one book , and then you 'll read us another book you love books and it 's fun to watch you tell us your own versions of the stories you 've started playing with your brother and it 's so sweet to listen to you two giggle you love to hug him and say noah 's such a cutie dootie ! you are so sweet when you include him in your imaginary games he looks up to you and adores you so much lately you 've been playing campout with your play tent and you include noah in on it here is your blue dinosaur costume you made up from our cooking mitts and a playsilk lol you are a social butterfly you love kids and love to go right up to any kid and talk to them you expect everyone to play with you and i love that life is fun , and i love that you think so too you are very polite and so attentive when we 're out and about you are sweet and well mannered at home , you let loose a lot more , lol paige , you teach me something new every day i know we have our hard times when we fight you are four now , after all i'm learning about patience the same way you are you taught me that taking at least five deep breaths is a great way to calm my body when i'm feeling mad you learned it at school thank you ! it really works like a charm and it keeps me from feeling too mad and prevents me from yelling i understand that now you 're learning about becoming your own person and it 's my job to be tough and teach you the right way now we both have the secret to staying calm ! asleep on the school bus , i have to carry you into the house most days preschool is tiring ! i'm so proud of you my sweetie you are growing up so fast i wish i could slow you down i do , however , enjoy watching you light up as you make your discoveries and find out the joys of life it 's the joy in my life i love you so much and i 'll love you no matter what from now until forever remember that i love you always , mama save