hi ! i looked outside and saw we got the snow that had been predicted ugh grumble i heard paige chattering away in her room so i went on in when she noticed it had snowed she about passed out with excitement it snowwwwwwed ! she yelled she did a little dance and said let 's go play in it ! we can play in it ! riiiiight ? right ! yeah , we can do all kinds of things in the snow let 's go mommy ! she ran away and down the stairs i grabbed a now awake noah from his crib and down we went i managed to explain she had to have breakfast first before we do anything and she wolfed down her oatmeal like it was nothing i did n't want to go outside at all at all i hate the cold and i grew up in maine ! i tried to think up a worthy excuse as to why we could n't too early , we had to get ready for school , noah was too little to go , etc but she looked so darn excited , i just could n't break her little heart i knew they would n't be playing outside at preschool later , and i also knew that rain was on the way time to seize the moment ! i looked down and she was pulling on her boots over her jammies hold on , i told her minutes and a fresh outfit for her later , i was getting her decked out in her winter gear annoying ! and then had to get noah into his winter gear more annoying ! and then i had to get into my winter gear i had n't even eaten breakfast yet , but we were on a mission people ! after the fresh hell of getting everyone into the gear hats , mittens , snowpants , coats , boots , etc etc i popped noah in his carseat bucket seat and also covered him in a blanket paige ran outside and said we 're here ! ! ! it snowed ! ! ! ! weeeeeeeeeeee ! ! ! ! she ran all around and threw herself onto the ground with abandon to make her first snow angel of the season she proceeded to make at least of them all over the place she instructed me to start the snowman and to let her know if i needed her help ha ! after all that , we went around to the front of the house to wait for her preschool bus i 'd luckily managed to sneak in making her lunch and getting her bag ready we then went sledding down the driveway no worries , we are n't on a real road several times more snow angels , snowballs , and eating of snow and then the bus came paige was smiling and began excitedly telling the driver about all the exciting things she 'd just done paige was breathless and shaking with excitement while her gorgeous eyes twinkled i'm so glad i said yes save you might also like preschool ! time to enjoy treasured moments linkwithin