hi there ! like , totally , right ? that 's me channeling my late s self we 're totally facebook official around here the me wee etsy shop now has a facebook page ! rad phew , i 've been busting my butt to get my work up in the shop , then to create the facebook business page , and now i'm working on promoting it there 's about a zillion shops on etsy and it 's so hard to be seen or found there ! we 're talking needle in a haystack i 've read up on seo search engine optimization and have gone through the shop and anything related to it with all the techniques in place so that google can find me i 've spend endless amounts of time tweaking and editing and polishing so that i may have a better chance of being found on the web it 's harder than i thought ! so , if you have a moment of free time ha ! would you mind checking out the facebook page and liking it ? and if you have even more free time guffaw ! , would you considering sharing it with your friends there ? only if you feel it 's sharable , of course as with anything , the more people i can reach through your help ! the better my chances of making a sale and possibly turning this venture into something i appreciate your help so very much the me wee page will have instagram photos that show arty inspirations , my work in progress , and anything shop art related i bet i 'll even slip in some family stuff here and there too i also want to be able to chat with people , take suggestions , share ideas , and discuss fun things i want to be able to share some arty things here in this space but do n't want it to take over this is the space we talk about family stuff , right ? stuff like how noah just pooped and spit up on me minutes ago in one fell swoop , but i digress so if you want to follow the arty designy inspirationy things that might not always show up here , you know where to go and yes , i just made all those words up thanks again friends ! back to our regular scheduled programming tomorrow ! perhaps i can manage to shower in the meantime ? save you might also like in progress new work career dreamin' linkwithin