hi friends ! i'm weeks along today time is flying ! the pregnancy is going well baby boy is healthy and growing well because of my t shaped uterus , i go in every weeks for an ultrasound to make sure the baby is growing properly we got to see the little guy yesterday and he 's lookin' good ! at one point , i could see his eyes opened , and i could see his mouth opening and closing he 's getting a chubby baby look about him already yay ! paige got to see him and she kept saying he 's so cute ! just like dolly ! lol i will agree that he 's cute the not so good news ? i can barely walk i have had a torn labrum in my right hip since and the pregnancy hormones make it hurt a lot it 's a horrible shocking pain that often sends me to the floor or into involuntary screams it sucks i would rate the pain a out of but now , my left hip is experiencing similar pain but i think that is sciatica because sometimes i feel bad twinges in my lower back and back of my left leg with it either way , some days i can walk ok with some effort , and other days i just sit there and cry and wonder how i'm going to get through the day while trying to care for paige when chris is at work it 's hard the other day was the worst i was up screaming in the night and the pain was so intense the next morning found me barely able to take steps i manged to squeeze a visit in to the orthopedist and he gave me a cortizone shot in my right hip it 's got a chance of working , so we shall see that was days ago and i'm able to walk today , so it must be helping ! that visit to the doctor was hell because i had to bring paige with me , i was alone , and was carrying all the crap you need to have with a toddler let me just insert that chris wanted to be home with me , but had to be at work for reviews and meetings with staff , etc you know the drill he just could n't get away it took forever to get from the car to the office and p kept tantruming not wanting to be there in the waiting room and then not wanting to wait in the exam room i 'd brought toys , even the i pad but nothing would help she just kept crying and screaming until i began to cry too i could barely move , much less comfort her the nurse kept coming in to try and entertain her and just looked at me with sympathy blah luckily , one of paige 's therapists arrived for her regular appointment she was happy to meet us there at the doctor and whisked her off to the waiting area with her huge sack of toys and games the angel of the day ! p was happy as a clam after that and i got my damned shot anyway , i just needed to vent being in constant serious pain sucks i have to care for my little one despite it all and just push through basically , i 've been sweating a lot , gritting my teeth a lot , and i go to bed early at night since i use up all my energy luckily , there are good days mixed in where the pain is tolerable and i can function so that is what carries me through let 's just say i'm looking forward to our little boy 's arrival for more reasons than one ! save