deer nursery art print fawn print purchase x inch size or x inch size hi friends ! i 've got a whole bunch of woodland critter nursery art prints all finished up and ready to go ! i'm so excited with how they came out paige age now ! begged for me to put the unicorn print up in her room and i was happy to oblige ! i recently showed a few of the original paintings of these at a local art show i did and the children who walked by all stopped and gushed about them and wanted one for themselves each one had their own favorite ! bear cub nursery art print purchase x inch size or x inch size it felt so awesome to see children in real life enjoyed my artwork and they were enthusiastic about it enough to want it for their rooms i noticed those kids were around years old or so the prints work great for baby rooms but also work great for older kids' rooms too because they do n't look babyish they grow with your kids i sold some to adults who favored a certain animal too good for their office space or craft room win ! bunny nursery art print purchase x inch size or x inch size unicorn art print purchase x inch size or x inch size i have two sizes of prints for sale x inch and x inch the larger prints are the size of a standard vinyl record album cover they are great when framed they are n't too big or too small and work well hung in a set the x are smaller and work well framed standing upright on a dresser a friend of mine has a whole series of them framed and hung in a row lining her daughter 's bedroom wall really cool ! i will continually add to this line of animals i'm currently working on a raccoon and a chipmunk as i write this do you have a favorite critter you 'd like to see ? feel free to comment below ! baby chick nursery art print purchase x inch size or x inch size the original paintings of these are for sale at megan carty art they are x inch acryla gouache paintings on aquabord like clayboard i did the little accessories on watercolor paper , trimmed them out , and used archival gel medium to glue them onto the painting i like the little added dimension of that they also come with a cute little display easel i think this style would be great for your own small custom pet portrait please email me at megan megancartyart com if you are interested in something like that ! here 's a little high speed movie of one being created the prints are archival giclee this means they are done on super fancy thick cotton paper with fade proof professional inks so they are made to last and be of the highest quality i hope you like them as much as i do ! fox nursery art print purchase x inch size or x inch size lamb nursery art print purchase x inch size or x inch size blue jay art print purchase x inch size or x inch size unique bird art print purchase x inch size or x inch size if you want to keep updated on new works as they come out , get free arty downloads by me , and get special deals only for subscribers , then sign up here for my monthly newsletter save