hi friends ! for those of you who have been following along with paige 's morning sleep chronicles , here is my latest update it 's going well ! she 's making it to nap time at about or she 's usually up around or or so but , she 's never ready to go to bed hours after that , so we just stick with pm for being in bed by knock on wood , she 's been typically getting up at am as the average much better than or , right ? every minute counts darnit ! i'm thrilled with the results so far now , i'm working on introducing more activities during the day that will tire her out what ? ? ! ! tire me out ! ! ? ? ? neveeeeeeeerrr ! ! ! ! is n't that photo hilarious ? she was walking around shrieking as loudly as she could at the moment as i was saying , i want to tire her out more during the day now that she 's walking so steadily i figured now was the time to try out a gymboree class she loved it ! paige runs around that place like a wild woman , trying out all the climbing stuff and getting into everything she certainly is n't interested in the class part of it the circle time and such but she loves the music , bubbles , and playing on the equipment i'm looking forward to seeing her have fun there and also enjoying the open gym times they offer great for indoor play when it 's raining or cold ! i also have a membership for her at the gym where she can use the pool with me it 's another great way to kill a chunk of time while tiring her out although i think i'm the one getting more tired out i thought you only wanted to tire me out ! ! ! ? ? ? ? ? ? and we have a picket fence going up around our yard i'm so excited to be able to let maren the wonder dog out to run freely no more stupid doggie run where she gets tangled or pushes her toy out of reach and paige can zip around without me having to worry about her running to the road or any number of dangerous treats i dream of being able to sit in a chair to watch her play because i'm a lazy bastard c'mon , you know what i mean chasing her away from the street or the front steps of doom become pretty boring and tiring after the th time and a girl needs to sit every once in a while , right ? again , my goal is to tire her out , not me i'm tired enough for all of us anyway so , there 's a few days left until the fence is done , but now there 's a rainstorm from hell blowing through for most of this week so we shall see ! it does n't rain most of the summer , and when it finally does , it 's right when i'm most excited for this fence not that we 're going to be playing out in the rain anyway so i guess it does n't matter , does it ? indoor playing here we come ! i 'll stop rambling now and wish you a great start to your week ! ! ! i hope all is well with you ! save