hi friends ! so , i'm weeks into this pregnancy and feeling exhausted , sore , crampy and every other thing that makes it hard to function but i'm thrilled to be in the home stretch and feeling excited to see little baby bean ! i thought i 'd take some time in this post to discuss the very beginning drama of this tricky pregnancy if you have followed this blog , you might remember that i suffer from depression and anxiety i 'd been managing and getting by for a while using paxil after unsuccessful attempts with prozac and lexapro i felt fine enough , but i was still severely lacking in motivation and oomph the day i found out i was pregnant surprise ! ! ! ! ! and we 'd just donated most of our baby stuff ! i realized that paxil is a class d drug and not for use during pregnancy so , i stopped taking my pill that very day i figured , eh , i'm feeling good enough i'm going to have to tough it out without it for the sake of the baby oh my i ended up having severe paxil withdrawal the next day , i woke up and felt so seasick i had severe vertigo and began throwing up this went on for days i never had morning sickness with my other kids and this felt different somehow to things i 'd heard it was the same response my body had at other times on days i forgot to take my paxil i would become incredibly dizzy and nauseated i would then spend the day throwing up but i always felt better once i took my paxil and it took a while to make the correlation that that was what was making me sick my body depended on it it took me exactly weeks for the seasickness to end i could n't drive or function normally during that time i had to lay down all the time and it was so hard to take care of my kids i depended on friends who brought paige to and from preschool those days when i could n't move or lift my head up i had horrible night sweats where i had to change my clothes times per night there was n't a moment where i felt good it was awful it was such a relief when the withdrawal ended and i felt like myself again ! i will never go back to taking paxil never please know that this drug keeps you physically addicted by making it almost impossible to come off of i would n't wish the hell of that sickness on my worst enemies i wish i had been warned about this before ever taking it in the first place i share this post to let others know my story so they do n't feel alone if they are going through the same thing a friend of mine who suffered similarly said i 'd rather go back into basic training than take that drug again sounds fair to me in my next post , i will talk about the ramifications i went through during my pregnancy after i stopped taking my anti depressant and what i had to do to fix it depression and pregnancy is very serious and no joke see you soon ! save you might also like , , and months old ! liam 's birth story welcome liam philip carty ! linkwithin