i do n't know about you , but i gave up trying to look cute a looooong time ago with the kiddos and life and trying to adjust to all the changes well , fashion fell to the back burner not even the back burner the trash ? the dump ? do n't get me wrong , i have a good day here and there , but not every day every day is more of a jammie just wear what i slept in and hope i make it through the day alive sort of look shower ? nonexistent half the time hair ? pulled into a bun or ponytail usually dirty and messy makeup ? ha ! i 've hit the schlump wall i ca n't take anymore of myself looking like i crawled out of a dumpster i 've spent the past several weeks consulting magazines and websites on what i should be wearing these days but , most of the stuff i 've found is focused on the working woman cute things dry clean only things form fitting and restricting things sigh i have n't found much advice for moms specifically , stay at home moms or work at home moms who want to know what might work for our specific lifestyle i decided to take on the challenge myself , dammit i'm now doing a new line of posts from time to time called stay at home mom style where i will feature an image of myself how i usually look , how i might look if i put in minimal effort , and how i look when i plan out an outfit and actually try without trying much ha ! first , i had to come up with a list of clothing requirements at home mom fashion problems here 's my list specific to me clothes must be comfortable this is obvious , but not just for comfort 's sake what do we do all day ? bending , cleaning , wiping hello spit up ! , picking up toys , playing with my little ponies on the floor , changing diapers , playing tag , putting strollers together , crawling on the floor with baby the list goes on and on clothes that have tight seams or stiff edges are not comfortable in these listed situations is it any wonder that sweatsuits and work out gear are the choices of many ? clothes must be machine washable much of the day i'm covered in spit up , marker , food , drool , snot , tears not only my own , haha ! my clothes must be washable i ca n't afford constant dry cleaning nor do i have the time to schlepp my stuff to said dry cleaner clothes ca n't be easy to wrinkle you know , i hate ironing so i do n't bother i wear wrinkly clothes all the time oh well if i can , i try to find non iron shirts and clothes made of fabrics that do n't easily wrinkle problem semi solved the neckline ca n't be low , loose , or revealing i have an month old he pulls ! plus , i'm always bending down and i do n't feel like showing the ladies to everyone in the room nobody wants to see them anymore anyway , trust me clothes must be flexible to wear different seasons i live in northern new england it 's a long ass winter i need things to work from fall , through winter , and into spring thanks to leggings and thick tights , i can wear a lot more for longer yay ! thank you layering ! thank you cardigans ! so , that 's my list that has helped me figure out what need to be wearing so , let 's get on with things ! first , let me show you what i would normally look like when home sitting around the house all day and not going anywhere try not to scream i 'll try not to cry i wore those jammie pants and tshirt to bed i threw on the workout shirt over that so i did n't freeze to death when i brought paige out to her bus i wear contacts , but of course do n't make the time to put them in shower ? ha ! so , not long ago , if i decided to get dressed to run to the store , i might have thrown on an old pair of jeans and a cute top slipped on some easy shoes and off i went just grabbing groceries you know the drill but , i still felt frumpy what ? a wet hair bun is n't stylish ? i decided that showering at night is the best solution to staying clean once the kids are in bed , i have more time for self care i even blow dry my hair so that there 's not much to do in the morning innovative , right ? ha ! i 've always heard that accessorizing was key when it comes to looking more pulled together but i did n't know what the hell that meant on my own , i 've discovered that a little extra detail takes no real extra effort but makes an outfit looks more put together here , along with my cute downeast basics top from the last photo , i added a yellow leather skinny belt , trouser jeans jeans , but they look dressier , and fun yellow flats for good measure , my hair is dried and i have deodorant ! it 's the little things just the belt alone was the trick to adding more sass no real effort ! the trouser jeans are the same effort , but they seam more expensive and dressy , do n't they ? shh , they 're not ! a better look would probably be skinny jeans or jeggings but i do n't own them that 's that this outfit fits the bill for a day at home and running errands your average every day it 's in the upper seventies for the high temps today , so i wo n't be totally sweating in this outfit i'm in air conditioning in my house anyway here 's an image of the outfit with different shoes a platform wedge i do n't normally wear high heels , but the platform in these makes for a lot of support my feet do n't hurt in them but , i would n't wear shoes like these all day maybe out to lunch or for shopping ? on a movie date ? and finally , here 's another version of the same outfit where i tuck the shirt in and put the belt around the jeans i like this too , but i still have a tummy from having noah remember my crazy huge belly ? so i prefer the untucked look the jersey knit to the shirt is smooth , stretchy and comfortable , but not very forgiving around the belly when tucked in ! for good measure , i added a chunky bracelet , a bit of mascara , and a bit of plum lip stain so , the jersey knit shirt comfortable , machine washable , wrinkle free , simple neck , good under a cardigan when cold check ! i got it from downeast basics they are n't sponsoring this post or anything , i just found their clothes and love them trouser jeans comfortable , machine washable , wrinkle free , check ! these are kut brand from nordstrom i'm short so i had to have them hemmed free at nordstrom when you buy them full price these jeans were n't expensive either , wooo ! another bonus is the denim is stretchy and soft so , they hug my curves and i can bend , run , sit on the floor whatever and they feel nice they do n't dig into my skin or feel stiff at all shoes the yellow ones are old they were from the gap the platform wedges are new and from aerosoles yellow belt banana republic chunky bracelet coach a gift ! so , that 's it ! i hope you liked my first little style post i did n't study fashion i'm just a graphic designer who likes color i'm a regular gal who has real life fashion issues i'm not trying to create a style statement or win a fashion award obviously i'm simply trying to look a little more together in my daily life so that i feel good i feel more confident and happy when i feel like i look my best and , let 's be honest , it can be fun to look sort of cute ! or at least dressed do you have any style tricks you love ? wanna play along and do before after pics of yourself ? feel free to do your own stay at home mom fashion posts and put the links here ! let 's inspire each other and if you 've got fashion all figured out ? these posts are n't for you revel in how lucky you are ! p s do n't make fun of me p p s i'm sucking in my stomach like mad in all these pictures i thought i 'd pass out save