hi friends ! thanks for your patience with my little rant the other day i had just had it with all the negative crap out there eating away at our childrens' lives i understand why schools have had to pull activities , foods , etc out of the systems because of lawsuits , red tape , politics , etc while i believe in our right to sue , i do not believe in abusing that right and ruining things for everyone when it is frivolous anyway , i'm moving on now i'm reading reader 's digest filled with heartwarming stories , exciting news with happy endings , and funny jokes and anecdotes a more positive news source compared to many others and it reminds me the world still has many happy things going on onto the next ! since paige was born , my art life has taken a huge backseat baby comes first , obviously as time has gone by i 've been itching to be creative again if you read this blog frequently then you know that i 've been taking a watercolor painting class to get me out of the house once per week so that i can focus on something that i enjoy and relax it 's been so great ! i have so much fun and really have learned a lot i 've only got classes left which leaves me wondering what i 'll take next perhaps sewing ? anyhoo , i decided to incorporate painting into my life a bit more but how to do that with a now semi crawling baby ? i need to be nearby to keep a watch on little p whenever she is awake so , we took one of my office desks and put it in the family room at a window overlooking the conservation land behind our house i can see paige 's play area to my right as i work and i have the wonderful natural light coming in through the window it 's been a great solution to incorporating my time for painting with being with paige why should the two be separate ? why go into a different space and treat my creative life as a separate one from my daughter ? i love that i can dabble at my work here and there while she 's around and i just feel happier in general i like that she can watch me do something i enjoy and know that she can be a part of it too if she wants of course , the majority of my time will still be spent playing with her , teaching her , and tending to her needs but it is nice to know that i can include my own needs into the day and i now have a place to do it ! here 's a painting i did on my own here at my desk without the guidance of the teacher it is of an old converted barn in maine from a photo i took one summer the computer is n't normally going to be at the desk , but the photo i was using to paint from was on my flickr site and i was too lazy to print it out then , of course i had to check facebook ! damn you addictive facebook ! damn you ! save