hi a b been a long time since we corresponded i was doing good for a while but i have hit a bump in the road with depression trying to come back in i have a few questions for you when if you have time firstly let me say that i tend to think negatively in general about myself too poor , chubby , and my life world is a sad scary place , people are no good anymore , tv is all important , only looks matter to people etc odd thing is , even with those thoughts milling about , my mood can be ok for long stretches and then boom when the fall comes i start the fearful thoughts about how i tend to start depression cycles in the fall and how will i avoid it this time ? ! and oh my i am going to get so depressed ! yadda yadda so what happens , of course i start to get depressed i am practicing techniques from brainswitch out of depression i am determined to not give in this time the first big depressed feelings came on saturday but there was the build up as i described above so , i immediately lose my appetite and you know , all the familiar symptoms start returning and i think crap i may not survive this one ! why ca n't i be like other people ? what if i am not strong enough to derail this ! great there goes sleeping ! ? questions as i practice , how do i keep from feeling like i am under constant threat of thoughts ? i have this general i am not safe feeling like i must be on alert at all times for the negative thoughts and therefore i ca n't relax another question if i do n't put the lie to some of these thoughts wo n't they keep returning ? do they need looking at ? is there any benefit to answering back ? or do we just say hi thought , i am not going to pay attention to you ? i ask because i used to do these exercises that david burns recommends that are take the thought , write it down and then categorize it under one of his ten categories of irrational thoughts and put the lie to it example i am depressed and always will be thought type labeling , all or nothing , etc truth i am not always depressed , only sometimes and i live through it and this will pass in general my life is good do you see any value in this type of exercise ? or do i just thought jam as soon as it comes ? hippity hop ! will burning the hippity hop pathway make the yucky thought pathway die down eventually to the point that it wo n't return or do you think on some level these thoughts need more of a punch in the gut , or some kind of rational answer to keep them at bay ? i tend to have this thought that if i do n't look at some of these thoughts , then i wo n't be able to prevent the horrible things they are telling me will happen i appreciate your books and your existence your success in a major inspiration to me when i feel like i ca n't do it , i recall that you did , so if someone can , then i must be able to in brainswitch you mention that millions of people have recovered from depression , i keep reminding myself of that it 's true right ? warm regards , r dear r i 'll answer your questions in the letter you wrote your question as i practice , how to i keep from feeling like i am under constant threat of thoughts ? i have this general i am not safe feeling like i must be on alert at all times for the negative thoughts and therefore i ca n't relax my answer the thought pattern i am not safe is a strong one because as you think a thought over and over , it becomes dominant but just because a thought pattern is strong in your brain does not mean that the thought has any basis in reality in reality you are safe your thoughts have no power over you you can always think any thought you want to think , ca n't you ? hippoty hop replace the thought i am not safe with the thought i am safe now whenever the thought i am not safe occurs , replace it with i am safe now or you can use i am okay you always have the power over your own brain to think any thought you want to think fear is just a thought you can replace fear with a nonsense thought , or some other more productive or objective thought any time the fear thought comes up your fear bank is full because you keep investing in fear thoughts your safe bank will fill up as you invest it with more i am safe thoughts your question if i do n't put the lie to some of these thoughts wo n't they keep returning ? do they need looking at ? is there any benefit to answering back ? or do we just say hi thought , i am not going to pay attention to you ? i ask because i used to do these exercises that david burns recommends that are take the thought , write it down and then categorize it under one of his ten categories of irrational thoughts and put the lie to it my answer the exercise that david burns uses is a good example of cognitive therapy , changing rational thinking for irrational , emotional thinking but putting the lie to an irrational thought can never erase it all you can do is keep doing the exercise when the thought pops up once you think a thought , it is forever in your memory banks however , the less you think any thought , the less powerful it is david burns' exercise is okay because doing the exercise is certainly better than thinking the negative thought but once you understand how the mind works you can see that the exercise is , in a way , just going around in circles once you decide that any negative thought is no longer an option , you need n't put the lie to it which , because the brain works by learned association can even make the negative thought stronger you simply turn away from the negative thought , give it no more energy , and proceed to think a more positive , objective , or productive thought which sets you going ahead in the right way with your day even a nonsense thought keeps you from thinking a negative thought and progressing from the nonsense thought , you can move on to more productive thinking depressive feeling is also a thought pattern which is strong because you have allowed depressive thinking for so long but as you successfully brainswitch out of the depressive feelings , you can then move forward with your day productive activity and thinking will sooner or later bring about better feelings bad feeling are just long standing bad thinking habits you can do it i still get depressed feelings especially at night when i wake up they are just as bad as they ever were except that i have tied to them by learned association the thought that i can do a mind exercise to get out of the bad feelings then i do the exercises then i get out of the bad thoughts and bad feelings in just a few minutes now instead of my being depressed for days or weeks like i used to i am out of it in or ten minutes i no longer have fearful thoughts worrying about maybe i might get depressed , because i know that if i get depressed , so what , i can immediately get out of it i know i do not have to pay attention to my depression , and so it no longer has any power over me it is just an old thought pattern that pops up now and then , and hurts like hell , but ca n't stay long because it has no power it ca n't use me any longer because i know i do n't have to think it i can think something else instead a b curtiss