hello a b curtiss you probably are aware of mike freeman 's minutes depression cure ? see http www neverdepressedagain com index php ? sid en dsar sd when i read his sales letter and then i read the information on your site about your two books it seems almost as if he took what you are teaching openly , honestly and for a reasonable price and made it into a sales product ! ? do you think this too ? did he ever contact you ? many greetings , i t belgium dear i t i do n't know what his cure is he has not contacted me and i do n't want to pay the price to find out a b curtiss hello mrs curtis , thank you for answering me so promptly ! mike freeman speaks about the different centers in the brain that when they are activated produce certain chemicals and that by his cure or minute technique one can turn a kind of switch in the brain that stops the depression mode and activates the joy mode again he also calls the depression mode a kind of unhealthy prolonged repair mode all this made me think about what you write on your website and because you are open with it and not coaxing someone to pay first i tend to trust you more so this morning i ordered your book depression is a choice and if i like it as much as i expect i will then i will also order your brainswitch book thank you for all your efforts to help people who suffer this terrible dis ease ! many greetings , i t dear i t you are welcome you may email me with any questions you have while reading my books i do n't charge for this also , you might be interested in the essay i wrote about joy a while ago here is the essay essay on joy i did n't see myself as a negative person until i heard a talk by science fiction author david brin he asked his audience , why do we worry about terrorist attacks , the stock market , and healthcare when we live in the most advanced civilization the world has ever known no other human beings have ever been safer , better fed , or freer why do n't we just take joy in that ? kind of weird joy seems to be humanity 's lost secret nobody talks about joy , do they ? why do n't we take joy in that did n't seem all that profound a statement so i was surprised that my mind kept coming back to it until that moment i did n't think of joy as something you take anyway ! i thought joy happens to you on special occasions , or when you least expect it i did n't know i was getting ready to discover the lost secret about joy i started out to study joy in all innocence , not expecting anything earthshaking and yet , i thought , why would n't it be as true for joy as it is for honesty and courage ? that you personally have to do them ? you do n't wait around for honesty and courage to appear you return the money when you get too much change when confronted by your accusers , you do n't lie , you stand there with nothing but your small pitiful truth in your hand we take courage , we take satisfaction as an act of will why do n't we take joy ? is it because we 're not grateful ? i did n't think so anyway , being grateful for things is not exactly the same as being joyful , is it ? being grateful for liberty is not the same thing as the lump in your throat when you hear the star spangled banner perhaps at that moment , we are taking joy in our country , without realizing we are doing it i felt a strange excitement like i was getting close to something really important could we learn , i asked myself , to take joy on purpose , whenever we want to , instead of just letting it happen by accident ? i felt like an entomologist with my pin poised over an elusive butterfly for starters , who better to study than myself ? next morning , my husband asked me to get something out on the patio i stopped myself midway in my task , and asked myself , why was n't i , right this second , if we are going to study ourselves , it 's best to go second by second taking joy in the scent of jasmine , the soft breeze blowing the leaves about on this beautiful southern california day my immediate excuse was that i was in a hurry to get something for my husband and i was still in my bathrobe , was n't dressed yet , had n't fed the dogs , or the cats , so it was n't the right time that was an eye opener do i put off joy until the right time , until i'm all finished ? am i ever all finished ? wow ! it all started to make sense if we do n't take charge , leadership does n't happen if we do n't take care , safety is n't there if we do n't take courage , courage does n't appear but , if we can exercise leadership , safety , and courage why ca n't we exercise joy ? because joy is a feeling ? but we take disappointment all the time we take offense after dressing , i cut some roses i like flowers in the house but liking flowers in the house , i suddenly realized , is not real joy , is it ? even being grateful for flowers is not joy even taking satisfaction in the fact that you picked the roses , and brought them in the house , and they looked real nice is not the same thing as joy i was getting closer and closer to the truth , even though i did n't know it why do n't i take joy in these flowers , i thought ? so i made a decision , then and there , with rose basket in hand , to take joy in these flowers , in this day , in this room i stood in of course i did n't know if it would work but i determined to stand there , and allow it somehow , to give a pure act of attention to the roses , not knowing at all how to do it i took a deep breath , let my shoulders fall , put myself on pause , stood still and offered up my whole self to the roses i just went belly up to the roses it was at that moment the great secret revealed itself there was complete silence time seemed to stop as well something had changed i felt something definitely more essential about the flowers than just liking them it was more connected something rose up inside me i would describe it as a kind of expansive sun rise of the heart it was like love , even though it was n't exactly head over heels exciting love but then this was my first attempt i was surprised it worked at all i was amazed , actually , that one could take joy instead of waiting for joy to make it 's one way communication , and haphazard appearance i am convinced that taking joy is a lost secret that taking joy is a latent human capacity we do n't have joy whenever we want it because we are moving too fast , and have forgotten how to take it i succeeded in exercising joy the very first time i tried it wo n't get me a nobel prize but i have tried it since , again , and again the really strange thing is that i found i could do it anytime , even when i was depressed that shocked me more than anything else that you can take joy even when you 're depressed and you can experience what i can only describe as a momentary bliss it also makes you doubt the reality of depression that can be so easily interrupted by another choice interesting i can take joy anytime i want who knew ? if i slow down , just stop my whole life for a minute , and focused completely on some small thing outside of myself , just went belly up , and surrendered my whole self to it , i could actually take joy in it and if i can do it , anybody can do it you can do it joy is humanity 's lost secret , but anyone can reclaim it