i have vivid memories of living in leeds , as a young child , and playing tricks on my dad for 'mischievous night' when i was about nine , this past time disappeared from our calendar and i only thought about it again last week as we celebrated my dad 's birthday my brother had no recollection , so this started me off on an internet search to find out if i had made it up ! i was pleased to discover that 'mischief night' was indeed celebrated up north on the st of may , as a late april fooling pastime my memories included covering our front doorknob in treacle so my dad got a sticky surprise upon his return from work i do n't remember if he found it as amusing as we did ! according to my sources , the mischief night celebrations were originally part of the may day festivities but were moved to november th during the industrial revolution i did n't mention these pranks to my own children for fear of a sticky entrance when i got home , but i did suggest we had a bonfire to celebrate may day 'what 's may day all about mum ? ' 'ah ! ' i was n't sure which version of events to give them did i opt for the fight for an eight hour working day , and tell them it was actually international workers day ? or did i tell them that the romans did n't need much of a reason to have a good knees up and celebrated the coming of spring with dancing ? i could go down the religious route and mention the celebration of the virgin mary , or pop back to the th century when the puritans put a stop to all may day celebrations due to the immorality of the drinking and dancing probably best to avoid all scandalous reputations when addressing the children ! the victorians enjoyed a revival in may day celebrations in the th century , but they ignored the historical aspects of the day and embraced it as a more straight laced children 's festival maybe my children would prefer this version of events personally i prefer the medieval way of dedicating the festivities to robin hood ! legendary characters aside , i decided to tell them about the pagan origins and that may day was also known as beltane as beltane is a celtic fire festival , this was a perfect way to explain my sudden urge to have a bonfire these fires were lit to mimic the sun and ensure that there was a plentiful supply of summer sunshine does n't sound so daft now does it ! so whether you decide to celebrate may day with a skip around the maypole , a spot of morris dancing , crowning yourself as may queen , or leaving work at pm , do it with a smile on your face and a sunny intention in your heart may day was celebrated as a fertility festival to ensure the towns and villages had an abundance of good soil , crops and babies that sounds like a great excuse for a celebration if you ask me ! will you be dashing out to wash your face in the morning dew , for a beautiful may day complexion , or will you let this day pass you by ? i 'd love to know what you think