after the adventure of 'skipping' on last week 's challenge , i opted for a much calmer exercise regime this week and gave power walking a try ! we all learn to walk at a young age , so walking is as natural as breathing or so i thought ! apparently i do n't do either right ! swinging my hips is a no no , panting and gasping for breath another no no , embarrassment to my daughter the biggest no no of them all so i stopped swinging my hips as i walked her up to school and tried to relax into a brisk pace it does help to have a lovely place to walk , a forest , the park or a canal path would be great the main road did n't have the same aura about it and the coughing and spluttering added to the look of desperation but at least i was out and moving more ! the weather has been a bit hit and miss this week so it 's been more of a challenge dodging the rain , sleet and snow but i was determined wet and cold but determined ! to help me with the walking part of my resolution i went along to my local library and got a book out called 'walking for weight loss' , it 's really good and i would highly recommend it as i said earlier , apparently i'm not doing it right story of my life women normally walk at mph as an average , if you want to lose weight then you need to walk a bit faster , mph will help you cover a mile in minutes and contribute to your weight loss it 's great if , like me , you are foot inches but when i went walking with my mum she was practically sprinting alongside bless her little legs ! sorry mum do what feels comfortable for you there are some great books and websites , such as this one http walking about com about walking for weight loss and health if you fancy giving it a go , log on and check out some of wendy 's top tips do n't forget you can get the family involved , walk the dog or someone else 's ! walk to school or work instead of taking the car , park at the car park furthest away from the shops top tip walk a dog or borrow one as i 've discovered this week walking has n't just helped my weight loss another lb ! it also lifts your mood when you get away from the choking smog of the main road that is ! there are loads of emotional benefits of walking increased energy , less stress , better sleep and it can relieve your pms , hurrah ! alongside the emotionally upbeat feelings you also reduce the risk of heart disease , stroke , type diabetes , cholesterol and a whole host of other nasties ! it 's got to be worth throwing on a good pair of trainers or walking boots and popping out for a stroll week has been a mixed bag for me on the one hand i am watching friends give up on their resolutions , i have also felt the pull to climb back under the duvet instead of persevering and then on the other hand i have felt upbeat , calm and thoroughly enjoyed getting out in the fresh air i have a photograph stuck on my fridge of lara croft angelina jolie that is keeping me going with my 'move more' resolution this is what i hope to look like by the end of no problem ! ! watch this space not sure about hotpants for the school run though ! ? next week is half term for us so i think i will challenge the kids to a dance off wii fit alert !