february in review i m continuing my monthly blog review with a recap of february i find this is the ideal way to assess the posts i ve written and the interaction they received , as well as share the links in case anyone missed one i ve also shared the link to a guest post i wrote for the women writers , women s books site february was all about the theme of self love on my blog , and it was a popular topic with my readers it seems we all suffer from a little self doubt , comparison , and guilt ! how was february ? stats i m over the moon with the increase in views this month overall , the blog received , new visits which is incredible yay ! the most popular post of the month was stop comparing yourself to others biggest interaction for a blog post ever ! published posts week top tips for working on self love week ditch the guilt week stop comparing yourself to others week february in review guest post motivate me ! using real life to influence my non fiction on women writers , women s books goals for march when i glance out of the window , i can see a few signs of life there is a smattering of colour in the flower borders as the daffodils break through , and with it comes a sense of relief that winter is almost over i thought it would be the perfect time to blog about clearing and cleansing in readiness for spring cleansing our mind , body , and soul , as well as clearing the clutter emotionally and physically , so check back every monday for a new post over to you your mission if you choose to accept it is i thought it might be a fun twist if at the end of every monthly review i set you some fun and thought provoking exercises i want you to think about the following questions , grab your journal and note down any thoughts or feelings that bubble to the surface or feel free to add your thoughts in the comments below i was delighted to see that following my january in review post , fellow blogger , shaun , from clockworkclouds dedicated an entire blog post to his answers for last month s questions you can read his post here q what is it all for ? why am i doing this blog career hobby ? q what do i want out of blog career hobby relationships life ? q where can i find the balance in my life ? i ll add another three questions to the march review you don t need to share your answers they re for your personal development if you can keep all your notes together in one journal then by the end of the year , you ll have a great overview of to work with when you want to do a review , set goals , or release anything that isn t serving your greater purpose until next month thanks for visiting my blog , i hope you enjoyed this post want more ? connect with me here twitter shelleywilson , instagram or check out my facebook pages http www facebook com fantasyauthorslwilson and http www facebook com motivatemeblog you can also find me on pinterest