this week is apparently the most notorious for abandoning our new year 's resolutions and i must say , i can absolutely relate ! ! i received my regular email from weight watchers early on sunday morning , this week 's was entitled 'snuggled up from the snow ? tv snack tactics revealed ' all i could say to that was too late now ! ! ! with my bleary eyes and inexplicable bed hair , i contemplated the bag of crisps , cheese and crackers and the cadburys chocolate bar i had absentmindedly stuffed the previous evening in my defence it is very hard work building snowmen ! ! ! i also cleared the drive of all snow which obviously deserved a treat this then turned into two treats when it started snowing again and my freshly cleared drive had yet another blanket of snow over it ! however , i refuse to let this minor setback veer me off course so , for the 'third' time this week it 's been a l o n g week ! i have drawn a line under it and am starting again that is , until my parents turn up and whisks the four of us off for hot chocolate and croissants ! ! snow days are fatal ! ! o m g it 's not rocket science , all i need to do is eat less and move more ! surely even my brain can understand that concept ? weight watchers to the rescue again , according to their new plan there is a scientific reason why i ca n't stop shovelling snacks as well as snow we all understand that , when we have n't eaten for a while and our stomach is empty , we encounter a physical urge to eat homeostatic hunger scientists have now discovered that we also have a physiological urge to eat which can make us believe we are hungry when it 's not real hunger hedonic hunger both ways activate the same areas of our brains ! weight watchers are helping members to form positive eating habits so we can control the hedonic urge to eat unfortunately i missed the memo ! ! check out weight watchers magazine february for full facts and great recipe ideas hurrah ! so it would appear that i am not the failure i believed i was but my will power is being tested and all i can say is bring it on ! my line is clearly drawn under the past days days until weigh in can i turn it around in time ? the tension mounts , it 's nail biting stuff note to self check how many pro points in chewed finger nails i am aiming for another lb loss but if i manage to stay the same and not put any weight on , this will be a mini triumphant in my toughest week yet of course it does n't help when i get text messages from domino 's pizza checking if i'm okay because they have n't heard from me in a while !