it 's week of my resolution challenge , month one is to eat a healthier diet and hopefully lose weight and have more get up and go well , what a week it 's been ! i joined weight watchers last wednesday and after clearing out the fridge and cupboards of anything lovely , oops , i mean unhealthy , i was ready to start my new healthy eating plan i am over the moon to announce that i lost lb this week that 's potatoes ! i know because i weighed them out to see what lb felt like , the kids were amazed it felt fantastic , a long way off the suicidal feeling i had last week when i found out i 'd put stone on in months ! i was n't the only one who had a good week , two of my friends lost lb each and one lady , who joined with me last week , lost and a half ! ! ! ! so i left the meeting today even more determined , inspired and raring to go being a single mum to three amazing children and running my own business means that i need to be as organised as i can luckily i am slightly neurotic about planning some may say control freak ! but it 's paid off i planned out every single meal breakfast , lunch and dinner and allowed myself points for a little treat here and there i even cooked for the freezer ! i know , i'm turning into my mum ! the kids have been great and every dinner time has been like masterchef , today mum , i give your dish ten out of ten their favourite meal was the cheat 's chicken pie from the new 'everyday favourites' weight watchers cook book a chicken pie with only a small puff pastry top , filled with chicken , mushrooms , leeks and a creamy sauce all for pro points yum it 's normally difficult for me to keep up the momentum of a 'diet' but instead of working towards a goal , such as a holiday , i am working towards a healthier lifestyle this has kept me motivated i 've cut out all the usual processed food that made up the majority of our meals and with a little planning have produced healthy , low fat , tasty dishes which are also child friendly 'look no crisps ! ' even my daughter ella , who is , had a pile of raw carrot sticks instead of crisps much better for her and it teaches her about making healthy choices all in all it 's been a fabulous week and a wonderful start to my resolution challenge check back next week to make sure i stay dedicated to the challenge and find out if i can shift another lb , the challenge is set