i love rhonda byrne 's book 'the secret' and have one of the inspirational quotes thought 's become things , pick good ones written on a chalkboard in my kitchen when my children are having an off day and all i hear is 'i ca n't do this homework ' or 'i 'll never remember my spellings ' i take great pride in tapping my chalkboard and showing them my 'mummy knows best' face i therefore had to giggle when , as i sat at my kitchen table , head in hands at the prospect of my imminent weigh in , moaning at myself for being a reckless snack eating freak , my fourteen year old son tapped on the board as he walked past and raised his eyebrows in a look beyond his years ! i narrowly missed his head with the tea towel as he ran off laughing cheeky sod ! he did perk me up though , so i wrapped up warm , pulled on my wellies and trudged through the snow drifts to my meeting i'm so glad i did as i had lost another lb 's ! ! i had spent all week blaming the snow for my lack of motivation to eat healthily and yet because of the bad weather i had abandoned my car under foot of snow and walked everywhere ! it certainly paid off , see the happy smiling face as i blog ! ! yay ! our quest for the week ahead is to take control of our 'snack attacks' when watching tv a mighty quest indeed judging by my week 's stats ! i have scoured the cupboards and removed anything with 'chocolate' or 'pringles' in the title , leaving me with sugar free jelly , meringue nests , weight watchers yogurts and lots of fruit that 's much better as the fluffy , white stuff continues to pour from the skies i decided that this week s meal planner would have to be warming as well as filling , so one of my normal days now looks like this b'fast porridge made with water or soya milk , banana and blueberries snack fruit lunch homemade vegetable soup with a tuna salad sandwich on brown bread no butter and a small bunch of grapes dinner spaghetti bolognese tv snack attack meringue nest with jelly and a weight watchers yogurt not bad when i look at what i used to eat in an average day b'fast x chocolate brioche rolls , cup of tea snack cup of tea and a couple of biscuits lunch cheese sandwich on white bread and with butter , crisps , cup of tea and a biscuit or three dinner steak pie , chips and baked beans tv snack attack tea and biscuits at every advert break ! ! ! ! plus wine , pizza takeaway and chocolate at the weekends what a big difference i am now entering the home straight , only one week left of january and my healthy eating challenge if i can shift another pound and a half in this week i will have lost a total of lb in days i 'd be more than happy with that as a start to my resolution challenge