my 'do something i 've never done before' month is going very well , however , i seem to have the knack of fitting extra curricular activities in to the schedule during the first week of may i pottered in the garden and created a gorgeous fairy garden which is blooming nicely ! last week i tackled the sewing machine and embarked on a quilting quest this week i had decided to calm my antics slightly and enjoy a girlie pamper session definitely something i 've never done before as i am such a tomboy but prior to my lash tastic hour of bliss i was faced with the daunting task of putting together a mountain of flat pack furniture allow me to explain ! my daughter is away with school for a week and i thought this would be the perfect opportunity to redecorate her bedroom as a surprise at the time it did n't cross my mind just how much work this would entail but as the cardboard boxes kept arriving my stress levels began to peek ! the fourteen packages included a corner wardrobe , a triple wardrobe , a double wardrobe , a bed side cabinet , a desk and a single ottoman bed ! phew ! i'm exhausted just reading about it flat packs can be a challenge at the best of times but with just three days to build , paint and dress the room i realised i had bitten off a little more than i could chew it was one of my lovely clients who suggested that i use this experience as part of my blog , 'how often do you flat pack ? ' she asked so true so my 'sixty minute makeover' became part of my resolution challenge i must say i felt a huge sense of satisfaction when it was finished and i know my daughter will squeal with delight when she gets home my hands are covered in blisters , my knees are creaking in a most alarming manner and every inch of my body aches but this challenge was definitely worth the blood , sweat and tears so finally , after the last of the empty boxes were recycled , i could concentrate on my original plan and enjoy a girlie pamper session with ellie from solihull based 'beauty by ellie' dressed in my joggers and t shirt i must invest in a frock ! i reclined on my spa couch and turned my stunted little lashes over to a very talented beautician it was n't what i expected in fact i would highly recommend eyelash extensions purely for the relaxation of it i would have nodded off if my good friend , sarah had n't been primed as star photographer and kept prodding me for my next shot ! it was pain free , quick and relaxing and i found it highly amusing when ellie brushed my new long lashes with her tiny lash comb ! so here you go before during after ! long luscious lashes looking lovely ! what do you think ? how many of you are girlie girls and enjoy regular pamper sessions ? or how many flat pack kings and queens are out there ? let me know , i 'd love to hear your thoughts and stories remember to choose a 'comment as' from the drop down menu so we can all read your flat pack , lash tastic tales , until next week x