skipping ! ! as i cast my mind back years , i have fond memories of me and my school pals skipping across the daisy filled playing fields , pigtails swaying in the balmy summer breeze , singing along to the jump rope song of the week ally , ally , up see daisy let 's forward wind to the present day , now a year old , sedentary mother of three , and skipping just does n't have the 'glow' i remembered omg it 's really hard work ! let me paint you the picture it was a miserable day outside but i was eager to get started on the 'move more' part of my resolution i decided that due to that fact i have no ceiling pendants i could get away with skipping indoors ! ! after taking out the wall light fitting , i moved to the front room which was slightly bigger ! i cleared space and flicked on the telly to keep me company any warm , fuzzy feelings about skipping soon fizzled out when i started leaping around my living room , i was like a lava lamp folds of flab clashing together , boobs bouncing right and left , up and down ! shelley 's top tips to consider before embarking on a skipping regime wear a sports bra ! and tena ladies ! knee supports , elbow pads and a crash helmet would n't go amiss either ! after five minutes i had turned an alarming shade of crimson and my heart was singing to me what are you doing , you crazy fool ? what are you doing , you crazy fool ? if i tried to do half an hour of this , my kids would be mopping my remains off the lounge carpet ! so , for the sake of my children ! ! i stopped after seven excruciating minutes and spent the next twenty three minutes flat on my back watching the tiny , tweety birds , circling about my head ! i am in luck however , this month 's essentials magazine march , featured an article tiny tone ups on how short , sharp bursts of exercise can be just as beneficial hurrah ! i'm saved i am not going to beat myself up about the inability to skip for half an hour , instead i am going to do smaller bursts and mix it up a couple of years ago , we were selected as one of the 'birdseye families' , we were given a string of challenges and set to work blogging and experimenting with birds eye recipes and exercise targets , they sent us a very posh skipping rope which lets you know how many 'skips' you have done i decided to adopt a triathlon style to my routine minutes of skipping aaah ! , minutes running up and down the stairs and minutes of wall slides squats much better ! still challenging but not so suicidal my heart is now singing skip jog s l i d e , skip jog s l i d e ! i am glad this week is over , i found skipping a wee bit tough ! however , all that lava lamping meant another pound lost at weight watchers , not all bad then ! next week power walking !