march has arrived and so it 's time for resolution number do something creative ! creativity is different for everyone my talented friend sarah , knits the most amazing cardigans and jumpers my son creates stunning pastel and oil paintings for his art coursework my mum makes her own handmade cards and my good friend nicki from http sunshinegirlnicola blogspot co uk can knock up a quilt in a weekend ! my childhood favourites all of these crafts are wonderful ways to flex your creative muscles for me , it 's writing that ignites my creative side writing stories inevitably came from my passion for reading as soon as i learnt to read i was hooked , i was a walking sponge with pigtails ! my favourite book was enid blyton 's 'the folk of the faraway tree' and i still have my original copy some years later when i was n't reading , i was writing short stories and little poems about the seagulls outside my bedroom window at the tender age of i had my exam coursework a children 's story read out in class , a proud moment i have written a number of picture books but like the hundreds of other wannabe writers , my stories have gathered dust in a desk drawer as i got older i picked my pen up once more and had another stab at it , this time concentrating on magazines i was published in my local newspaper , in fate fortune , slimming world magazine , your home , writing magazine , woman family health special , scrapbooking , spirit destiny and spent six months as a reader agony aunt for woman yet again life took over and i laid my pen down to rest with the usual thoughts swirling through my mind , 'not enough time , ' and 'not good enough ' so on new year 's eve i decided that i needed to stop procrastinating and just get on with it make time ! i'm years old and the only past time i have ever enjoyed has been dabbled with and then stuffed in a drawer no more ! you will never win if you never begin march is all about being creative and even though we are only a few days in i have been a very busy bee to get the creativity flowing i have joined a creative writing class through solihull college submitted short stories and flash fiction to five writing competitions told you i 'd been busy ! written book reviews on amazon , one review for closer ! by julia douglas a lovely feel good read with a dash of girl power ! managed to achieve something i thought was impossible i have written every single day so far ! that includes , blog posts , stories , newsletter for body soul , letters to magazines and homework but i realised the 'not enough time' was a fib , if you love something enough you 'll make the time i have ! have a think about which creative pursuit you could get involved with next week i will be showing you one of our creative writing exercises from college it 's so much fun and i know you will all want to have a go yourselves until then i'm off to fill another notebook , have a great week x