for my 'move more' resolution i decided to embark upon a treasure trove of exercises from my youth i 've skipped sort of ! i even tried a quick hula hooping session , but lacked the ability to keep the hula airborne for longer than five seconds i walked , ambled and sashayed to the park and back and even broke in to a gentle jog at times all very old school eh ! so what delights did week hold for me ? well , let 's crank up the volume , get down with the kids and bang on the wii fit ! oh yes , if it 's good enough for the youngsters then its good enough for me let me ask you a quick question first who has challenged a year old to a dance off ? quick answer me and i would n't recommend it ! in my oh so distant youth i could throw a few decent shapes on the dance floor , of course these amazing dance moves were carefully choreographed in my bedroom with wham blasting from my record player yes i said record player ! ! ! today 's kids are lethal and take no prisoners ! my son is 'sick' on 'just dance' did you notice the young lingo there it 's a whole new world ! let me quickly explain the rules for those of you without a wii , without this particular game , without kids or simply for all those sensible people out there ! you can choose from a huge range of songs , from the more up to date rap songs to elvis once selected a dancer pops up on the screen or multiple dancers if you are challenging an opponent and it 's your task to follow what they do as if dancing in a mirror when they go left you go left , when they jump up and down you jump up and down , fairly straight forward you would think ! our first challenge was a blues brothers song , i was happily singing along , thinking how lovely it was to be having fun with my children , when i got a smack in the mush from my son 's wii remote as i failed to duck , swing and s l i d e in time to the music , ouch ! fun ! i was black and blue by the end of song three ! to save my delicate skin from bruising like a peach , i decided to abandon the dance game and switch to the wii fit , a relaxing fitness regime i could enjoy on my own the kids heckled me from the sofa ! i was pretty bad at the baseball and absolutely rubbish at bowling but i thoroughly enjoyed the boxing ! word of warning though i felt like i had done ten rounds the next morning , my arms and shoulders ached like crazy but i do believe the old bingo wings were n't quite so flabby ! so the wii journey draws to a close as i enter week of my 'move more' challenge what shall i choose i wonder ? the bets are in , the decision is made , my dad would be so proud of me yes i am going down the cycling route no pun intended ! this should be hilarious , see you next week !