project you ! week avoid goal setting and abandon the to do list last week we looked at how to stop feeling guilty , you can read that post here today , i want to talk about not setting goals don t adjust your monitor i did just suggest that you avoid goal setting me , the queen of resolutions ! over the past year , i ve had to abandon some challenges due to my health it was upsetting and unnerving as i saw this as a failure ' as the year rolled by , i began to understand the importance of living without a purpose my to do list was , and still is but in a much smaller scale , a great comfort to me i love a schedule and a deadline , and i find it helpful to run the household events tasks using a paper diary and calendar however , how often have you looked at your to do list and felt defeated ? not because you haven t managed to tick off all the tasks but because you find those particular duties hold no meaning it s just stuff to do instead of activities that drive your real goals forward these days , my to do list includes scheduling blog posts , author interviews and book reviews i m fortunate that i love doing this however , i used to forget to plan in writing time for the books i m working on it s all very well promoting other books but not to the detriment of your own career ! i didn t want to lose any enthusiasm for blogging , reading or writing , so i made sure to block out sections of my diary to work on my wip if you find yourself getting caught up in a to do list that fills you with dread rather than inspiration , then it s time to re think your strategy it s your well being and sanity that could suffer if you don t we all wish to wake up in the morning full of purpose and passion for our daily work , tasks , or events when this fire begins to splutter , or worse , go out altogether , then you ve spread yourself far too thin and your health , both physical and emotional , will be at risk try listening to your inner guru what is it telling you ? be instinctive in your actions and shift towards activities and experiences that thrill you grab a piece of paper and have a speedy brainstorming session ask yourself the following questions what inspires me ? gardening , reading , crafting who inspires me and why ? friends , family , celebrity figures where can i go to feel motivated ? gym , coffee shop , stately home what can i do to feel enthusiastic ? hobbies , going for a walk , joining a group if money was no option , what would i do with my time ? dream big ! we get so caught up with our job or family that we become like robots , moving from one to do list to the next and never daring to deviate it s okay to allow yourself to step out of that comfort zone of goal setting , just as it s okay to abandon your to do list and see how the day progresses without this structure , you may just find new opportunities that delight your soul i d love to hear your thoughts on this post as a dedicated goal setter myself , it took time for me to let go of that stability and go with the flow now , i enjoy a balance of both