well , what a week it 's been ! there have been loads of high points but also the occasional low point who knew that healthy eating , could be so exciting ! let 's start with the great news i hit my challenge target for the week and managed to shift another lb , that 's lb in total , yay me ! my kids are always a huge support to me , whatever crazy thing i happen to be doing that week ! they all realised early on that i was deadly serious about losing weight and keeping it off this time and so have been even more supportive if that could be possible ! my eldest son , lee , happens to be an awesome chef and makes the best pork lasagne in the world ! of course it does help that the recipe is a weight watchers one ! so this week i had a night off and lee threw together this wonderful supper for us all as the weatherhas been so icy i 've managed to leave the frost covered car and walk my daughter to school nearly every day , the exercise and fresh air helped me this week , the added bonus is the more activity you do the more points you can earn for a treat or two ! i did succumb to a treat on saturday night , the children were in bed and lee was staying at a friend s , so i had sole control of the television a rare treat in my house , i foolishly decided to watch armageddon whilst dealing with an array of turbulent emotions i'm putting it down to those nasty christmas toxins coming out of my system ! so , weepy film emotional woman sob fest ! ! ! it was n't pretty and yes i attacked the crisp cupboard , granted i only devoured the one pack a tube of smarties and a freddo but i felt awful ! oh the shame of it ! on sunday morning i looked like i 'd had an allergic reaction to something face swollen and puffy not good ! i was determined not to let my moment of weakness trip me up so i spent the day cooking up a batch of bolognese , vegetable soup and a lamb casserole for the freezer felt so much better and even though my vegetable soup free points woo hoo looked a bit like wall paper paste , it tasted fab ! honest ! i have planned out the meals for the coming week , breakfast , lunch and dinner i have done my 'big shop' and i am ready and raring to go for the next week of my resolution challenge target for the week ahead is just lb , slow and steady wins the race apparently as long as my wonderful meditation ladies do n't bring anymore left over christmas chocolates to classes you know who you are ! ! ! then all should be well in the world of weight loss the end of month one is looming and apart from one small , emotionally fuelled , speed wobble , i'm having a great time i feel so much better in myself , not so bloated , clearer skin and omg bucket loads of energy , which helps when the kids challenge you to a wii 'just dance ' contest ! check back next week to find out how i got on !