days ago i gave myself a mammoth challenge weeks , days , dedicated to my new year 's resolutions ! not just 'doing' them and keeping up the motivation but actually blogging the entire event for the world to see ! so here i am on thursday st january , with month one now completed , yay ! the first challenge was to break bad eating habits and start a healthy eating regime after joining weight watchers on nd january , and dealing with the shock of my current weight , i 've spent january cooking up a storm , menu planning and making better choices , this has meant i enter month two lb 's lighter ! the initial brief i gave myself on new year 's day was to concentrate on one resolution , one month at a time this is still the case but i am definitely going to carry on with my new healthy eating programme for our leader andrea who keeps the solihull meeting in check i weigh less , have lost inches from my wobbly bits , have more energy and the social aspect of attending weight watchers meetings is invaluable we have such a hoot ! month one has made me re evaluate what we , as a family , put in our bodies and the harm processed foods , fats and sugars can do going to my weekly meetings offers the support i need to keep going , stay motivated and have a really good laugh if you want to do a healthy eating plan but ca n't get to a slimming group , find a friend who will be a 'diet buddy' , weigh in together at home and keep each other going support is key do n't get me wrong , i 've had quite a few wobbles on the way , most of these fuelled by chocolate cravings and emotional outbursts i 've had moments of madness , such as eyeing up the kids pet goldfish and fantasising about him deep fried with a pile of chips ! ! ! do n't worry he 's fine ! i 've tried to resist alcohol , but sometimes that glass of chardonnay is the only thing that will work ! i 've experimented with new recipes and the kids have supported me through the high 's chicken pie and the low 's chilli con carne without so much as a 'p l e a s e can we just have chips tonight ! ' and who knew sweet potatoes were so yummy ? how do i top this then ? what 's next ? my regurgitated new year resolution lists include 'lose weight' at the number one spot mission completed ! at number two was 'get fit' well , after years of a sedentary lifestyle not including 'disco dancing' showing my age now running around after kids and the occasional yoga class and holiday swim i think 'get fit' is a tough call when february is days long ! so , i have modified the resolution to 'move more' for each week in february i'm going to try a different form of exercise butt clenches as i wash up do n't count ! week skipping ! ! my work diary is packed out for the next week so getting out for a long walk , a run or a bike ride is n't going to work and i refuse to fail before i even start , so i decided skipping is the answer q did you know , the absolute minimum amount of exercise we should all be doing is half an hour , five days a week ! a i have n't done that since i was ! ! ! ! so this is my target minimum ! i hope you 've enjoyed following month one , please feel free to get in touch with your own tips and any comments , remember 'support is key' month one affirmation i am healthy and happy in my own skin