this happened two months ago , but , time just went by and i forgot about this miracle although , it might not be a miracle but a proof of stupidity , or a lack of real interest in kids with a neuropsychologist here is the story last september i received a phonecall from a very worried mom who is an ex client as well , very satified years ago home with burn out intensive coaching and neuroptimal with me brought her back on track i went jobhunting with her , and she is still on the job she found back then and , more important , she is still happy she calls me because her son , years old , is afraid to go to school this fear started in january , the week after the holidays were over because he cries every morning , not wanting to get into the car to go to school , but always decides to go to school anyway , crying coming into the school , she decides to call me for help with neuroptimal big troubles ! so , school asked the parents to have the child tested not asking why this behavior is happening ? ? ? ! the neuropsychologist tests him and diagnoses him with autism spectral disorder and a possibility to bi polarity , and on top of that an iq of ! ! ! ! omg ! , was my st reaction i asked the mom if she signed the diagnose she did n't , because she did not recognize her son in it nor did the boys teacher she got the bright idea to consult me i had met the boy when he was a toddler , when the mom was consulting me back then , and , if this would all be the case with this boy , then he would have had been in some kind of cruel accident and got braindamage ! so , i sit down with the boy , and simply ask him what happened right after the st week at school after the holiday he answers very clearly that is a very good question no one has asked this , but i can tell you i am so afraid to go into the school , because i am afraid of the monsters coming back again when the holidays were over , my parents thought i recovered completely from the flue , and , i wanted to be there at the first day in the new year , so i went to school but then i started to feel sick again , felt i was very warm and then i saw all kinds of monsters attacking me then i became scared and cried i just wanted to go home mom came to take me home , and i had a fever but , the week after , when my flue was away , i remained scared i feel scared everytime i have to go into the school i told him i completely understood what he was saying i asked the mom if she knew it her answer was no ! so , i suggested her to explain what fever can do with our minds and , that the brain sometimes fools us when we have a fever this boy had a post fever trauma of monsters inc i told him this , and then he laughed then , one neuroptimal session the next evening a happy mom drops me an email the kid went to school with no problem the teacher could not believe it and , they have the kids iq tested it suddenly went up to , which suits him so much more ! if it were the neuropsychologists decision , he would now have been drugged a really big thing and example of un interested professionals a miracle for the kid he came back another times , because he likes the sessions he has grown into such sweet self confidence ! these kids are the cherry on my cake in my work as a neuroptimal neurofeedback practitioner