i am on a week 's holiday in killarney with caroline and the kids we are staying at my parents' house edgar and jean ritchie i thought i would do a few interviews about their life this first blog is about their meeting edgar ritchie went as a medical missionary to umuahia in eastern nigeria in in twenty eight year old jean kingston arrived as a midwife to the same hospital edgar 's brother derek and his wife joan were praying that romance would blossom between the two paul had your paths crossed before you got to know each other in nigeria ? jean yes when i went to wesley college he was the head boy , captain of the rugby and all the rest he was so highly thought of and i was a raw little girl from west cork if someone had told me then that i would end up marrying you addressing ed it would have been like a fairy story i do n't think we would have seen each other after that apart from seeing him at george good 's valedictory where he ed was also being commissioned for overseas work shortly after jean arrived in umuahia edgar returned to ireland on furlough he returned six months later paul when did you realise that you were going to be more than friends ? edgar on the way back from onitcha where he had brought jean to assess the student midwives we met an ekpo man ekpo are a secret men 's society this man would have been dressed fantastically in a mask and headgear jean got out of the car to take photographs and i persuaded her to leave that poor man alone ! ! ! he considered it unwise and probably dangerous jean asked edgar if he remembered what they talked about in the car i explained to jean that as a missionary who was a single person one had to face the reality one might not marry paul edgar , how long was it before you proposed ? edgar shortly afterwards within weeks paul jean , how did edgar propose ? jean he arrived early on a sunday morning around am he knocked on the shutter and invited me up to breakfast i could n't go immediately as someone had put rollers in my hair and they were coming back to style it for me so two to three hours later i arrived at his house to find his cook had gone i am still waiting for that breakfast ! sitting on the couch he just looked at me and said 'will you marry me ? ' it came as a big surprise paul where did you get married and where did you go on your honeymoon ? jean nd jun , on a beautiful sunny day about a year after she had arrived in nigeria they were married in drimoleague , west cork we had one week in castlegregory and the second week in amsterdam , breaking our journey back to nigeria