we come to day with day with a list of shoulds we take at face value where would you like me to begin ? do n't smoke , do n't drink excessively , do n't be overweight , exercise , take your meds , ingest enough calcium , do n't shoot heroin , stay out of jail , do n't quit too many jobs , get your screening colonoscopy at , yearly mammograms after , wear a condom , sunlight is good , sunlight is bad , sunscreen is good , sunscreen is bad , coffee is good , coffee is bad only to have them rethought time and again roy is now finally off his hrt or so i'm told , he still does n't look post menopausal to me a few things i find myself wishing i knew the answers to will my children be damaged by all the video game playing i allow ? will my relationship with my children be damaged if i do n't allow them to play video games and survive the inevitable fights it will cause if they go out to ride their bikes instead nice healthy exercise will i wish they 'd stayed safely home playing video games if they get hit by a truck ? why did n't my children come with instruction manuals ? inspired by yesterday 's snow day and my patient today who is consumed with guilt and a sense of perfectionism with regard to her parenting something it 's easy to distance myself from during a psychotherapy session , but sometimes strikes a bit close to home will some awful consequence of gardasil the new hpv vaccine be discovered years down the line ? if obesity is so fatal , why , since the 's are there so many more obese people and why is the average lifespan years longer ? why do some people seemed to be unscathed by decades of smoking marijuana ? when my patients chronically misbehave and are completely uninterested in changing for example , young people who enjoy spending their time drinking to excess in bars , others who repeatedly and without regret sleep with strangers , those who consume large doses of prescription narcotics prescribed by someone else , or people who just wo n't entertain the idea of abstaining from marijuana am i wrong to continue to treat them on their terms ? if i simply refused to treat them unless they get treatment for their addictions , would they a stop coming , b stop telling me about their bad behavior , or c get treatment and clean up their acts ? when a patient complains of intolerable feelings of agitation or other vaguely defined distress , and gives me the walk a mile in my shoes talk , is it wrong that i sometimes offer a prn very low dose of an second generation anti psychotic , along with the warnings about possible induction of diabetes and dyslipidemia , and let them make the decision about whether to take it ? is it funny that i never ask myself if i should offer that script for very low dose prn xanax which is what they really want ? and what about the patient whose last depressive episode of many lasted nearly a year and who has never been able to tolerate lowering her zyprexa , should i stop it given that her risk factors for diabetes and heart disease are screaming in my face they preceded the zyprexa , but it ca n't be helping ? how do we know the worst of two evils ? were those extra children who died of suicide in compared to see pediatrics , annual vital statistics , death figures on page , children who were not taken for mental health care , or not offered anti depressants because of the black box warning added to anti depressants by the fda ? sometimes i wish i had a crystal ball that worked , one where i could fine tune it to ask the subtle what ifs when it comes to the long term prognosis for diet coke and hair chemical abusers , well , there are some things i just do n't want to know