all we had to do something a little different this week we three shrinks were all busy mother 's day weekend , yard work , longwood gardens , and luaus kept us too busy to get together to do a podcast i insisted that we find a way to do it online , so i finally convinced dinah that even she could do it ten o'clock last night , it all came together , and we were able to do a podcast , thanks to talkshoe if you have n't checked out talkshoe , do it it lets you podcast by phone ! as luck would have it , a storm came through and turned the transformer down the street into a fourth of july celebration despite being without power , we still managed to get it done is that dedication , or what ? so , here ya go it is a little rough , as we were n't sure what we were doing what else is new ? , and recording it via cell phone caused occasional lags and silent periods hmm , just like psychotherapy may , mother talkshoe topics include happy mother 's day ! turkewicz law blog a hit with clinkshrink her recommendations ? malpractice primer and economics q a zoe brain asks is there a standard of care for gidnos in the case where the patient is intersexed ? and does the degree of intersex affect the therapeutic regime , and if so , how ? i'm familiar with the wpath formerly hbigda v soc for gid but once a diagnosis of gidnos is established , the soc does not appear to apply answer huh ? we did the best we could also , see farmer v brennan apa says people with medicare part d having trouble getting their psychiatric medications also , discussion of the donut hole medical truth in advertising bill is your doctor really a doctor ? ethical conundrums trains and tarasoffs and guns oh my ! also , maryland 's problematic law requiring reporting of childhood abuse , even if you are now or you do n't know who the perpetrator is and , what do you do with a dead astronaut on the way to mars ? if dinah had lost it in space , she wishes she would have a crystal ball a shrink like me ? find show notes with links at http mythreeshrinks com this podcast is available on itunes feel free to post a review or as an rss feed you can also listen to or download the mp or the mpeg file from mythreeshrinks com thank you for listening