he he he i did n't take all my medication last night and i had a good day today it was not an easy day by far but i felt things more intensely than i have done for a long time i had forgotten that i was missing out on a part of life quetiapine is a really strong sedative i know this is a bad idea and i am sure not at all sensible but it was a genuine mistake which felt quite nice i am tempted to do this more often , just for fun ! let me explain i am really busy at the moment and i get frustrated that i can not fit everything i want to do into my life i am looking for a flat to buy i have viewed seven in three days and i have another tomorrow and another on thursday i am still really busy at work too i also have research to do regarding buying a flat and the various laws and leases for example when you own the property a freeholder i think vs buying the right to live in the property for years leaseholder it is all really complicated most flats are leasehold but sometimes you can buy a share of the freehold anyway , while i was researching the difference last night i remember thinking about taking my meds and then i think i forgot when i looked at my pill box mondays were missing i also had a slight sense of heartburn which i often get after taking them not painful but i just know it is there this really confused me as i seemed to have taken them because they were not there however i did not remember taking them anyway an hour later i was laying awake so i decided just to take half the dose of quetiapine i only take mg rather than the recommended mg so i knew an extra mg would not do me any harm i was a bit worried that i would not wake up in the morning because it was late and my normal dose usually knocks me out i had a really pleasant night though i stirred a few times which i do n't usually do and when it was time to get up i felt like i had rested for a while usually i fall straight asleep and wake up in exactly the same position the next morning , often with a few aches if i was not laying correctly i did not get up in time for work this morning , i have been having difficulty for a few weeks this is not usually a problem as i work flexi time so i just have to stay a bit later however , this morning i had a meeting at am and i knew i was going to be late i felt an anxiety in my stomach which i have not felt for a long time i found it quite exciting , it gave me a real buzz just for comparison i missed a more important meeting the week before christmas it was a am meeting and i did not get to work until am someone tried to reprimand me but i stood my ground and actually felt hard done by i was suppose to be on holiday that day and they were having a go at me for being late no anxiety crept in at all ! the meeting which i was minutes late for today was with my supervisor he started talking about the changes which will happen during and i got stressed by this i like my supervisor a great deal and he has helped me through some of the hardest times of my life but i have not felt a connection with him recently today however , he noticed this had stressed me and talked me through it until i felt better the day went well until about when i received a phone call from a meeting which i said i would make myself available for , incase they needed me first i received an instant message saying , can we call you ? when i said , sure , they said we will call in about minutes during those minutes i worked myself in to a state the difference between now and a few years ago was that i did n't avoid the situation the call went well in the end , i could answer the questions and i did not dwell on it after the event ! i wonder if today is a what a 'normal' day for 'normal' people is like i have definitely been missing all the emotions and i am wondering if i am over sedated i have only taken mg instead of mg again tonight as it was good to stir in the night i know only too well that this is not sensible the thing is that in the past this illness has scared me a lot i have always sworn i would never stop taking my medication even though i have always known that many people do after years of stability but they usually relapse at some point i did n't think this was worth the risk but maybe i will think again i had a good cry this evening as my dad got an email from a bogus lottery scam telling him he had won more than a million pounds he asked me to check it out for him and he said he knew it was probably a scam the thing is when i confirmed it was through the advise on the real national lottery website i could sense his disappointment it really upset me , i mean how the fuck do people get off doing things like that ! ! ! ! ! the lottery is a con anyway where people who are short of money waste a year on these tickets , spend hours clinging to dreams that will never happen and then if that is not bad enough someone comes and tells them they have won when they haven't , just to con money out of them ! ! ! ! it is cruel and praying on the vulnerable ! ! ! there are no excuses ! ! ! apologies for the language , i do n't use it often , but sometime it is needed to express the strength of emotion !