here in maryland , we have the best laws and delegate robert costa , a republican from anne arundel county district b , has another bill proposed house bill not withstanding the provisions of subsection a of this section , a licensed physician may present or cause to be presented a claim , bill , or demand for payment for a procedure performed during an office visit at which the physician did not commence treatment within minutes after the time scheduled for the office visit okay , so if the doctor runs more than minutes late , the appointment is free i love it ! did n't pizza hut once have a similar policy at lunch time ? your order gets filled in a specified period of timeor your pizza is free ? you 're worried about emergencies ? del costa has you covered , all the doctor has to do is present the patient left waiting with an emergency verification services number if he was held up by an emergency , and he can charge what 's an emergency verification services number ? i have no idea , but i'm wondering if this means the patient who had to wait gets all the clinical details on the patient with the emergency how does it get challenged ? i hate waiting , so i'm lovin' it oops , wrong fast food franchise but i'm kind of wondering why did del costa choose doctors as his target to legislate promptness ? why does n't my hair stylist have to give me a free blow dry if she 's running late ? how come the furniture delivery guys make me wait for a hour window and then still come late ? should n't my couch be free ? i wait at the mechanic , i wait often way too long at restaurants , i wait for the plumber and the guy who fixes the furnace i wait on line at the grocery store , i wait for patients who are late , no one is prompt anymore why is it only doctors who should not be paid if they run late ? if they get stuck in traffic ? if a patient has an unexpected problem and needs extra time ? if they have to call other docs , pharmacies , family members , labs , and insurance companies to coordinate care ? if someone 's late and their schedule gets thrown off ? i'm sorry mrs smith , i know you came from miles away after hiring a babysitter to watch your handicapped son , and i'm truly sorry to hear about that accident closing down the beltway this morning , but you 're late , and if i see you now , i 'll be late for the rest of my appointments today , and i wo n't be able to bill for them , and there is the matter of my mortgage , the kids' tuitions , and my student loans , not to mention dinner at the steakhouse and my bmw lease please do schedule another appointment to see me i imagine you guessed that i asked you to come in to discuss your biopsy results , and indeed they did show a particularly aggressive form of cancer with a poor prognosis , but we 'll go over that when your appointment is rescheduled