i have a question how do people put down diagnosis on insurance forms over time ? okay , it 's easy to start a patient walks in with major depression , recurrent , moderate in severity the patient takes medications and gets better no more symptoms they come once a month let 's say they come for a minute session once a month because but they are n't coming in and spending minutes talking about their symptoms they are n't having any maybe they spend minutes talking about medication related issues needing refills , lab work , side effects and then , they spend minutes talking about the events and activities in their life and their relationships with others maybe one of those relationships is having some difficulty and this is what they spend the bulk of the session talking about so what 's the code ? does it still code as a this is what they sought help for or does it now go on the wonderful form as major depression , in remission oh , but they 're only in remission because they are on meds and the next visit , the primary topic is a panic attack but they do n't have enough symptoms or enough frequency of panic attacks to actually meet criteria for panic disorder or maybe they do do you change the diagnosis to panic disorder , or do you leave it ? the following visit , what do you know , the patient is feeling a little depressed does the diagnosis change to major depression , mild ? and what about coding those sessions ? if the patient does n't talk about symptoms or medications , is it coded as a psychotherapy session or as a psychotherapy session with medication management ? i always code a on the theory that i'm a doctor , and at some level , i always consider from what i hear whether the medications are working enough , not enough , what ever if someone 's on medicine , there 's no way i can know before they walk through the door whats med management and what 's therapy i know one psychiatrist who said he codes therapy sessions as no med management and it 's often reimbursed to the patient at a lower rate i wondered , if the patient walks in and wants their medications changed , does he tell them they have to come back for a different visit ? or does he wait to see how the session goes and then decide what to code and what to charge ? there are things they do n't ever teach us in a formal way and there 's not a great way to ask ah , who do you ask ? i thought i 'd ask you !