the hospital where i work one morning a week is changing it 's electronic medical record system i 've never like the current epr because of privacy issues anyone with access can get into anyone else 's record as an employee of the hospital , i do n't like that so many people i know could read my medical record if i got my care there , and so i get care elsewhere hipaa violation , you say ? yes , but there 's no up front stop on looking at anyone 's record , the violation and sanctions come if you get caught aside from the privacy issue , psychiatry does not add outpatient notes to the record appointments are recorded , and medications are placed in the system , but no notes the current system is easy to navigate , i can read medical and surgical notes if it 's helpful to me , there 's a problem section , a medication section , labs what i need most which easily let you click on one to compare the value to those in the past , and a radiology section i'm not sure exactly why the upgrade to epic , but for a mere million dollars , epic is being phased in i'm in the third wave and yes , psychiatry notes will be included , though there is some system to mark notes as sensitive , and to get into these notes , the reader must click through an extra screen , a process called breaking the glass a psychiatrist has been designated to monitor who breaks the glass , one more responsibility in his already busy job description monday i went to the first day of my two day training to use epic the screens are busy the instructors were good , but the booklet was not we were told to read several sentences ahead , meaning you could n't just read and follow along i was not in the best mental state to concentrate , and two hours into the training , i just shut down i got lost in the screen after screen and annoyed by the privacy issues good news , now any doctor in the hospital can go in and look at any other doctor 's schedule to see which patients are scheduled why is that necessary ? at some point , i realized that the new system means i 'll have to sit with each patient at every appointment and start with the screen to verify allergies each time as is , i have template forms i have to fill out at each appointment now i can do all this while staring at a screen this is psychiatry ? what happened to listening to the patient ? is there a screen for that i let my screen go black one of the instructors came by and asked about that i'm done my brain stopped no more screens this is not the psychiatrist i want to be i sat through the rest of the day and and scored a on the test module i went home and sent an email to the clinic i'm resigning so i actually do want to go to the second day of the training i want to understand what it is i'm railing against i 'll work until the end of july , just long enough to test out epic , not long enough to master it maybe it 's a mistake ? maybe epic will add value to the practice of psychiatry ? i ca n't really say that i'm leaving because of epic , after years , it 's time i may be the psychiatrist with the longest tenure there now , and i 've long ago lost count of how many different social workers i 've worked with epic was the last straw , but i 've been thinking of leaving on and off for a long time oh , did i mention i 've quit times before ? and i needed a nudge so does your institution use epic ? how 's it going ? is it good to have psychiatry notes in the electronic record ? has your hospital had security breaches ? tell me your stories , i'm all ears