woo woo ! we made ten bucks ! some kind , anonymous reader i think it is the one who 's been yankin' our chain lately thanks , bud ! made a donation in our virtual tip jar for bucks i really did n't expect anything to come of this excuse me but gotta go use my steroid nasal spray allergy time some of you may have noticed that i added an amazon giving button at the bottom of our sidebar a few weeks ago this is a nifty way for people to contribute to a website they like , even as little as a dollar why do we three u s trained , working physicians want to panhandle on the internet for pocket change ? we can afford per month for the bandwidth costs siteground gb per month ! ! best deal on the net ! , or a c note for a microphone insert affiliate link here i was n't really sure why i did it , but i think i figured it out it 's like putting money in the hat of a street performer but then i saw this interview on rocketboom the two guys who dreamed up lonelygirl one is an attorney greg goodfried and the other a surgeon miles beckett left their safe , professional , paying jobs so that they could devote all their time to lg com , their new website where visitors can interact with bree lonelygirl and other not real characters for this they expect to eventually be able to cash in bigtime , with their million views per week hey ! we get thousand , so watch out greg miles so i am now in f'n spired i have handed in my resignation as chairman of the department of psychiatry at bigtime medical center so that i can devote all my time to mythreeshrinks com that 's right ! in two weeks , i 'll be unencumbered so that i can spend all my time devoted to improving our ite for our loyal readers so start clicking that button , folks every minutes oh , sure , wife was surprised even a little upset i think she 's jealous but then i showed her how just by clicking a button , millions of readers can contribute , , even each that really adds up i could tell by the look on her face that i convinced her that this is the real deal in fact , she 's on the phone right now , even as i'm typing this , calling her attorney probably to get advice on how to handle the coming tidal wave of cash maybe i 'll add some virtual shrinks for visitors to talk to like lonelyshrink or eliza or max we 'll do a daily videocast , like dr anonymous did but talk faster , with shorter pauses this is gonna be big ! look at those visit counters spin what 's that , wife ? someone 's here for me ? whoa , check that out ! there 's a car with flashing lights outside probably my police escort to the bank or something man , word gets around fast ! gotta go , folks thanks for the tips ! no , really , thank you better not forgot my steroid spray this stuff is great !