hi , it 's been a while i have been ranting in other venues , and caught up a bit in the all trump all the time phenomena so my latest thing to rant about is hospitals that send patients to jail when they do n't have beds i do n't mean people who 've committed crimes , i mean people who are in crisis , who are presumed to be a danger to themselves or others here are some of my thoughts on psychology today 's website , i wrote a simple solution to the bed shortage ? unfortunately , jail the link to that is here over on clinical psychiatry news , i did a little more research on the topic and spoke with the reporter , one of the doctors , and the rapid city sheriff see mentally ill ? go directly to jail the link to that is here but i 've learned that it 's not just in rapid city , south dakota where it 's an issue oh , and the sheriff there is apparently refusing to take these patients but other states have these issues as well my friend , pete earley the mental health advocate has been kind enough to share my outrage here on facebook , i 've noted when we submitted our book proposal for committed , our editor told us we had to take a stance and the message had to be something more than be kind to patients lately , i'm thinking that be kind to patients is not such an obvious thing in our crazy world last week , i wrote an article about a hospital in rapid city sd that announced their overflow psychiatry patients would be held in jail i researched the article after i first saw it on this fb page , so thank you to the poster today i read that in states people in mental health crises can be and are held in jail when there are no hospital beds available these are not people who have committed a crime why , as a society , do n't we think this is unconscionable ? could you imagine going to the hospital for pneumonia , being told there were no beds so you were going to jail ? why is jail ever an alternative to health care ? what is wrong with us ? colorado would outlaw using jails for mental health holds , increase services under million proposal denverpost com mostly i 've been surprised at how little outrage there is , though i hear the apa is now writing an action paper to oppose jailing psych patients will that help ? does anyone read apa action papers ? commenters say , well , most mental health care is given in jail and , sigh , we seem to accept that as okay , but this is different these are not people who 've committed a crime , these are patients going to an er for help ! they have n't broken a law , they are n't under arrest advocates want to increase laws to make it easier to force care , how about making it easier to access care in a humane and kind way ?