ladyk aka ladyak asked a while back about how drugs get their names hello there ! i have a question ! ! ! ! ! ! i can imagine roy crawling into the dungeons of some long lost medical library somewhere to find the answer to this anyways , this is really bothering me when i was a c d pharmacy student , one of the few things i learned was that there was some sort of nomenclature that was used to name drugs the generic chemical name , not those fancy drug pushers name why does trazodone have an one suffix ? as in a whole lot of corticosteriods end in one what does the one in trazadone stand for ? or does any of the name can be explained by nomenclature ways ? great question ! glad you asked the drug names are all decided by tony , bill , david , peter , and darin these are the most recent members of the usan , the united states adopted name council this is a member organization consisting of representatives from the ama , apha , usp , fda , and a member at large usan works with the world health organization to come up with rules for naming drugs , and agrees on new drug names after the manufacturer applies for a new name usually after submitting the drug to the fda as an ind investigational new drug there is a list of rules for naming drugs , typically based on their chemical structure , their therapeutic indication , or their mechanism of action examples a the name for the active moiety of a drug should be a single word , preferably with no more than four syllables b the name for the active moiety may be modified by a single term , preferably with no more than four syllables , to show a chemical modification , such as salt or ester formation examples can include cortisone acetate from cortisone , cefamandole sodium from cefamandole or erythromycin acistrate from erythromycin c only under compelling circumstances is a name with more than one modifying term acceptable compelling circumstances may pertain to such examples as pharmaceuticals containing radioactive isotopes or the different classes of interferons d acronyms , initials and condensed words may be acceptable in otherwise appropriate terminology to see the entire list of rules , go to this pdf , the usan stem list examples chemical suffix type of medication examples anserin serotonin ht receptor antagonists altanserin , tropanserin , adatanserin azepam antianxiety agents diazepam type lorazepam peridol antipsychotics haloperidol type haloperidol peridone antipsychotics risperidone type risperidone , iloperidone perone antianxiety agents neuroleptics duoperone pezil acetylcholinesterase inhibitors used in the treatment of alzheimer s disease donepezil , icopezil pidem hypnotics sedatives zolpidem type zolpidem alpidem pirdine cognition enhancers linopirdine , besipirdine , sibopirdine