the patient is agitated and intrusive he shows up without an appointment , and when i say i 'll see him , but he 'll have to wait , he is not pleased he knocks on the door while i'm with another patient he 's been off his medicines , and he 's decided he felt better with them i think we both felt better when he was on them oh , but he did n't like those medicines he wants something else he needs something else maybe he needs to be in the hospital ? he wo n't hear of it okay , go back on old medicine you 've been on before no how about medicine x ? no that stuff made his see dead bodies floating in space how medicine y ? no friend is on that stuff and it 's awful how about medicine z ? no oh , you think that will help ? okay , he 'll take that i think it will help oh , but then i remember that the state requires pre authorization forms and i'm already behind here and there 's all sorts of other issues , this patient is n't really in a great place for a detailed risk benefit discussion , he 's demanding something that will make him feel better now and i'm starting to feel his pain how about medicine zz ? i suggest a similar medicine okay , he 'll take that in fact , he likes the name i write a prescription , he leaves and i resume my regularly scheduled clinic morning and then there 's yet another knock at the door but if you think that other medicine is better , i 'll pay for it no , no , it costs hundreds of dollars , just take the other stuff really , he 's so bouncing off the walls that anything will take the edge off the morning goes on yup , another knock at the door the pharmacy could n't fill the medication , not sure why i 've now drowned i do n't have pharmacies and calls to the state , and finding the right form , and pre authorization phone calls and faxes and whatever else it might take , in me right now and oh , he 's not sure his insurance is even active i surrender and grab samples in the clinics , we save these for patients who have no other means of getting meds he takes them and he actually leaves next clinic day thank you , that medicine helped the patient is much calmer , i do n't once utter a word about hospitals no side effects and his insurance is now active i write a prescription fast forward to the next day my cell phone rings , it 's the pharmacy remember that patient i do , but i see him at a clinic and i do n't have access to his chart and why are you calling this number ? his insurance requires documentation that he 's failed two other medications in the same class and yes , those two medications both cost a small fortune as well , they are n't even asking if he 's failed cheap meds ! i do n't have a chart , but i think one of those meds made him see dead bodies floating in the air so let me get this right , i have a patient who was really sick , who 's been in the hospital before , who is now better , and i'm supposed to take him off that medicine that 's causing no side effects and put him on another , equally expensive medication actually two and watch him maybe get sick twice , before i can put him back on the medication that is currently working just fine ? and how was your day ?