it is sunday morning it took me at least mins to get to sleep last night i kept worrying wanted to put more stuff down but resisted don t know whether that is good or bad i still feel tired it is am , legs just shaking i feel very tense and shaky i am meeting my friend in an hour and a half so going to get up should i take the tablet ? ? ? logically i do not think i should take the tablet as i am not depressed , i wanna get up , i can t keep still i could lie and not take it they did make me feel better last time it is i am showered and dressed in my gym kit it has taken mins , i have been pacing most of the time i used to be able to get up and dressed in less than mins i am still shaking and my legs are twitching i can stop it but it is kind of more comfortable to let it happen my head starts racing if i stop i am going down for breakfast once i made that decision my leg just stopped and does not want to shake further i am now worried there is nothing wrong , i feel a bit calmer and have just stopped i feel sadder that must make me really sick and actually want to be ill ! ! o , i just feel numb and have a blank mind now i will go down for breakfast while i am not shaking i don t know whether to take the tablet ! i have had my breakfast i had two slices of toast and marmalade , a glass of fruit juice and a banana i looked at the yakult in the fridge but forgot to have it i have just been thinking about what i was like as a child , stuff that might help the psychiatrist a quick list as i am going out , i was always the weird one in the class , always called names , every school report said i lacked confidence , everyone called me shy although my friends disagree and i agree with my friends i have been told i am the quietest person people have ever met although not in the last few years as a younger child i was in trouble a lot for day dreaming and often sent out of the room as i could not sit on the chair for very long maybe i have adhd ? ? i am going to stop trying to diagnose my self as i do not think it is very good for me ! ! i did not speak to the teacher when i first started school i was too shy but i think i have grown out of it many many many years ago ie secondary school my mum still tells everyone i am shy anyway must call my friend she is not ready for the gym so i have a bit longer my mind has gone blank again i am not going to take the tablets as i am not depressed , i have been depressed before and this is not the same ! ! my friend is worried because a few years ago in the pub i went into the toilets and could not stop crying the doctor had prescribed me antidepressants a little while before and i would not take them as i did not feel depressed after that night i felt awful and i think i started taking them again they do seem to give me a boost but depression is not the cause i am getting a natural boost and extra hope from the support i am receiving from the social worker and my friend anyway i do think there is something wrong with me though ! ! i do not seem to belike other people and do not feel i belong right , i am going to pack my swimming gear and spend a few hours at the gym i quite like writing this though it gives me a chance to get things off my chest i have just read yesterdays document , it all sounds quite normal does that mean there is nothing wrong with me and there is no help out there ? ? ? that has to be the worse thing as it means i have just been attention seeking i would just have been wasting people s time and a burden to others but does that mean i want something to be wrong with me now that is sick ! ! i am going to be late to meet my friend and i still have not got my swimming stuff together i want to get everything off my chest but i should go and get exercise as otherwise i will be told to pull my life together o