imagine the scenario where you are an er physician , nurse , or social worker and a person is brought to the hospital by the police for making a suicidal threat i want to die my wife left me and our house is in foreclosure do you have any plans to harm yourself ? my dad shot himself when i was little that 's how i would do it do you have any firearms at home ? officer ! can you arrest this social worker ? he just asked me if i have guns at home officer come with me sir you have the right to remain silent this is the scenario that could actually happen if senate bill passes in florida the bill makes it a felony to inquire about firearms access or to include any information about firearms access in the medical record , punishable by up to years in jail and or a million fine excuse my french , but wtf ? ! an article in the psychiatric news by bob guldin explains that the bill was introduced in both the house and senate at the suggestion of the national rifle association nra to prevent intrusion into the constitutionally protected right to bear arms it has been shown that removal of firearms from the home reduces the risk of a completed suicide so you 'd think such a bill would get laughed out of the legislature ? florida child psychiatrist and apa assembly recorder said , this bill is not a stunt the financial power of the nra in florida will make it very difficult for sensible legislators to vote against this bill i note that a second version of the bill has been proposed , one that reduces the fine to a minimum of , for the first offense and a minimum of , for the third offense it also reduces the offense from a felony to a noncriminal violation and compels the states attorney to pursue a possible violation or face professional misconduct charges this version does permit certain health care providers to ask the question only in certain specific situations e g , an emergency mental health or psychotic episode but cannot tell anyone else other than the police apparently , a similar bill passed one house in virginia five years ago before dying next will be a bill that outlaws common sense clink comments we 've talked about issues related to guns before here , in dinah 's post guns and the mentally ill and again when i mentioned a poster session that talked about gun ownership laws nationally at my last american academy of psychiatry and law conference i mentioned that states have statutes with lifetime restrictions on gun ownership for people with mental illness other states have time limited restrictions on ownership , and some allow restoration of full rights contingent on a physician 's documentation of recovery so now we have a dilemma in states where you need a physician 's certificate to buy a gun , how can that same physician then be banned from asking about ownership ? ? i can imagine the session in which a patient comes in to be cleared to buy a weapon md well , you 're taking your medicine and your symptoms are all under control you tell me you 're feeling well and you 'd like to buy that awesome weapon you 've been dreaming about gun buyer yeah ! i 've done the research and i know exactly what i want md i need to know whether you have cognitive skills and emotional stability to handle a responsibility like that tell me , have you ever owned a gun before ? gun buyer awesome ! ! now i can sue you for infliction of emotional distress for violating my second amendment rights those triple damages will really help me stock up my arsenal bottom line the nra ca n't have it both ways if they involve psychiatrists in restoration of gun rights , they ca n't ban them for asking questions about ownership