i'm at my office today and i turn on my phone between patients there 's a text and a message , both from the same person where is roy , he 's supposed to be here at a meeting ? can you contact him ? interesting i scratch some body part or the other am i roy 's mother ? did someone forget to tell me ? i forward the text to roy , and welcome in the next patient after that session , i check messages again roy has texted me , i ca n't talk , i'm in a meeting i guess he got there oh good and the blog we have a rule about the sidebar dinah does n't touch it it 's roy 's rule , but i 've had a few problems , so mostly it 's okay but then , i decided i wanted a duck on the side bar i put one up that i can do roy took it down , because if i say earth , roy says mars duck no duck no duck duck should i start reverting to reverse psychology ? what was wrong with the duck ? i liked it roy put up a link to our book 's facebook page you remember , that book we 've been writing for about a zillion decades that never actually materializes i promise i hope that it is n't just a pipe dream so the book 's facebook page has a whopping fans and their photos are shown on our sidebar does jesse the chinchilla lover want his photo on shrink rap ? do we want to advertise our fans ? i take it down and roy tells me he 's frustrated that i undo things he does without talking to him first but my duck he took down my duck ! and he did n't talk to me first why does roy want the facebook page up anyway ? does it matter ? how will our shrink rap book fb page change the world ? oh , we had tried a shrink rap friend page , but that was too hard to manage i had to sign out of my own account and confirm new friends , and interact with them , and i'm a bit on overload in case you could n't tell ! we tried a fan page and that was fine only it was linked and combined with the friend page and who knew what was what i was pretty confused and i created them ! so roy made us a fb book page , only the book 's not out , so he does n't want anyone to know but he does want people to be fans so he can reserve a specific url for it huh ? and then he put his twitter feed in to it which would be good shrink rap posts would populate the wall , but then he had a twitter conference and all sorts of random tweets went twitting away on the wall and in my news feed i think i'm way too old for this anyway , roy is driving me crazy please join our shrink rap book page so roy can drive you crazy , too and clink has a new old post up on shrink rap today over at psychology today