it has been another beautiful day , the sun has been out and work has been really relaxed i spent lunchtime alone again but i was sitting outside in the hot sun and looking up at the manor house it was almost like one of those horrible american films that try to be english ! i made a few phone calls to people i work with who are based in germany and spain i normally avoid the phone especially when working with people whose second language is english i get nervous and worry they will think badly of me as i speak too fast and all my words roll into each other i felt so relaxed and chilled out that i actually enjoyed making the calls it almost came naturally all my meetings for my week in indy are starting to come together and i am making arrangement to meet the others who are travelling on sunday at heathrow i'm quite looking forward to it now ! i left work early today and came home i walked over to the park and sat by the pub it has been a lovely day i have never felt this settled and content in my life ! i was alone in the park but i felt content and at peace inside i do n't believe life can be this good i keep expecting it to end ! i talked to three people i did not know in the park i have never done that before one person asked me what i was studying and i said , i'm not , i am working he said sorry and walked off , i wish i tried harder to make conversation i spoke to someone with a dog the dog was trampling all over my work and me he pulled the dog off and said sorry i said i did n't mind ! someone smiled and said hello to me on the way home he was quite sexy i hope i see him again ! i'm too happy to think about selective mutism and stuff but realising and acknowledging that i actually had an anxiety disorder when i was three years old and that has probably caused the depression for most of my life has helped me come to terms with my illness and realise that i am not an out cast and thinking people hate me and being nervous has made it difficult to make friends i have been sick and it is not my fault ! ! my nephew is two and a half nearly as old as was when i started being mute at school you cannot blame a child that young for their behaviour i learned to hate myself as i was always in trouble for not talking and being told i was rude for not saying hello to guests but i could not help the anxiety i felt and it went undiagnosed for years , i did not speak to my teachers and never asked a question in class until even at university if i can live with that i am strong enough for anything ! ! ! ! i am actually starting to believe i am a nice person to know and people do not hate me ! ! life is great and i am so lucky to understand that and appreciate it ! ! i have to add i am actually quite talkative in meetings at work now i started talking more when i was doing my postgraduate degree i get a lot of encouragement at work from my boss and a lot of support from the whole department ! wow ! ! ! !