note as i was writing this post , pete earley reran a post he wrote in about this identical topic spooky ! please go over to his blog and read what he has to say about it here now that states are moving to create registries of involuntarily admitted patients , i think the time has come to reconsider an old idea , specifically the use of of psychiatric advance directives pads for those who have never heard of this idea , a psychiatric advance directive is a form of durable power of attorney it 's a document that a patient creates which states the kind of treatment the patient would like in the future , if he becomes ill and loses the ability to make treatment decisions the document may designate a person the patient wants to make decisions on his behalf a person known as a health care proxy or may just list the patient 's wishes about various things here is a partial list of the issues that get addressed in a psychiatric advance directive the choice of hospital the patient would like to be admitted to an affirmative statement requesting admission the types , frequency and dose of preferred medication consent for use of seclusion or restraint designation for care of children , property or pets person to notify or next of kin designation consent for use of electroconvulsive or ect treatment of course , the obvious thing about this list is that there is an assumption that the person is using it to request treatment when ill , but it can also be used to document which treatments , if any , the patient wants to refuse but what if a patient uses an advance directive to refuse all treatment ? here likes the conundrum what if the patient becomes violent or threatens someone else ? what if the patient 's condition deteriorates to the point that his life is in jeopardy ? for example , someone who is catatonic and unable to eat or drink fluids ? what if the patient is not dangerous or doing anything violent , but just needs supervision and nursing care help bathing or dressing or eating and ca n't live outside an inpatient unit ? should this person be allowed to stay in a hospital indefinitely when there is a huge demand for psychiatric bedspace for voluntary patients when a short course of involuntary medication might make them better enough to live independently , outside a hospital ? and what if the patient wants treatment , but the advance directive dictates a treatment that is experimental , ineffective , or even potentially harmful ? should an advance directive be allowed to contain a patient 's request for medical marijuana ? in some states , the treating psychiatrist is bound by law to follow the instructions in an advance directive and there are civil penalties for not following them also , in certain cases an advance directive can be overridden by the court if the patient becomes dangerous to other patients depending on how the directive is written , it can also be revoked by the patient once he 's in the hospital which makes the whole document rather pointless finally , many patients and doctors have either never heard of pads or are not familiar enough with them to use them this is why i'm putting up this post now i think the pads have potential utility and are certainly better than the outpatient commitment laws that many states have and that our state is considering to keep things simple , let 's start with the assumption that the patient actually wants to be treated when they are sick but loses the ability to make that decision in other words , the patient agrees with the treatment in retrospect ie i did n't like it , but i know it had to be done i 'd like our readers to discuss this so we can figure out better ways to make them useful have you ever written or used a pad from either a psychiatist or patient standpoint ? what worked , what did n't ? what would you like to see changed ? how could it be improved ? do you have a better idea than a pad ? if you want more information before commenting , here 's a one stop shopping site for pad information