responses what is your profession ? psychiatrist nurse practioner physician 's assistant prescribing psychologist other are you ready to begin using the new cpt codes next week ? yes no i'm not sure if i'm ready i did n't know i had to change how i code what have you done to learn the new codes ? taken a real life course taken the apa 's online course read the e m manual pertaining to psychiatry asked colleagues watched dinah 's youtube tutorial series taken another not apa course nothing , i am not at all ready other people may select more than one checkbox , so percentages may add up to more than has updating to the new codes cost you money ? no to to to to more than i have not yet spent any money , but i intend to soon are you hopeful that the new coding will result in higher reimbursements to you or your patients ? yes no i am uncertain do you see the changes to using the series e m codes as being positive for psychiatry ? yes no i am uncertain are you concerned that the new requirements for documentation will be a burden ? yes no were you already using the series e m codes in your practice before these changes ? yes no are you confident you know how to use and document the new codes in a way that your bills will be accepted by insurers ? yes no how do you feel about the apa 's support of the new billing codes ? good it 's about time psychiatrists should bill like other doctors good i am hopeful this will help destigmatize psychiatry bad i wish apa did not support these changes i am ambivalent i see good and bad to the process i have no feelings about this i am angry this adds a large burden to my practice people may select more than one checkbox , so percentages may add up to more than do the new coding documentation requirements change how much you worry about having your charts audited by insurers ? yes i worry more yes i am less worried then i was with the old ways of coding no i was n't worried before and i'm not worried now what percentage of your patients do you also see for psychotherapy ? none , or less than