in my prior post , we explored chronic worrying , some of the more common reasons why people develop the habit of constantly worrying , and the negative consequences habitual worrying let 's explore how you can become more aware of your negative habit of worrying all of the time and what you can do about it how to stop worrying the serenity prayer is a wise prayer to remember the step programs , like a a , have adopted it , but it 's valuable for everyone to remember god , grant me the serenity to accept the things i cannot change courage to change the things i can , and wisdom to know the difference know what you can change if there 's some action that you can take to improve your situation , do it it will empower you and make you feel less afraid of whatever might happen if you ca n't change it and there 's nothing for you to do , then there 's no use in worrying rather than railing against what you cannot change , it 's better to accept it assuming that it 's not an abusive situation and make peace with it one way to stop worrying accept what you ca n't change and change what you can designate a time to worry this might sound funny , but it 's better than spending all day and half the night worrying make a deal with yourself you can worry each day for mins at whatever time you designate if you feel yourself starting to worry either before that or after that , remind yourself of the deal that you made with yourself and stick to it ask yourself realistically , what are the odds ? step back from your situation and look at it as if you 're someone else if you look at it objectively and you think that the odds are high that your worst fears will come true , what , if any , positive steps can you take to mitigate the worst case scenario ? if the odds are low , ask yourself if it 's productive to keep worrying be objective and ask yourself what are the odds ? think about prior times when you became overly worried and things turned out all right think about all the times that you became a nervous wreck and everything turned out just fine did your worrying have any impact on the situation ? what did you learn from that situation and can it be applied to the current situation that you 're worrying about now think about if you are engaging in all or nothing thinking for instance , do you tell yourself things like , if i do n't get everything that i want in this situation , i know i wo n't be happy with it at all ask yourself if you are catastrophizing do you tend to expect the worst case scenario most of the time ? are you blowing the problem out of proportion ? ask yourself if you 're blowing things out of proportion ? ask yourself if you tend to take a negative situation and then generalize it to all similar situations for instance , do you have a tendency to say things to yourself like , my last boyfriend was a jerk , so all men are jerks ? ask yourself if you take a negative situation and generalize it to all similar situations ask yourself if you tend to allow negative thoughts to overtake you do you tend to see the glass as half empty most of the time rather than half full ? think about what , if anything , you 're doing to manage your stress do you meditate or do yoga ? do you participate in a regular regime of exercise that is right for you ? do you listen to relaxing music ? do you talk to supportive friends and family ? do you go out for a walk at lunch time ? develop stress management techniques , like getting out in nature getting professional mental health treatment if you 've tried all or most of these ideas to overcome chronic worrying and you still ca n't overcome this habit , you could benefit from working with a licensed mental health professional that can help you to work through these issues i am a licensed nyc psychotherapist , hypnotherapist and emdr therapist i work with individual adults and couples to find out more about me , visit my web site josephine ferraro , lcsw nyc psychotherapist to set up a consultation with me , call also , see my article how to stop worrying what is chronic worrying ? photo credit foxtongue via photopin cc photo credit genesedn via photopin cc photo credit erich kesse via photopin cc photo credit menage a moi via photopin cc photo credit s falkow via photopin cc photo credit lewishamdreamer via photopin cc