in psychodynamic psychotherapies , the concept of transference pertains to the patient 's tendency to impose feelings and reactions from past relationships onto the therapist the process is , by definition , unconscious and the patient is initially unaware that s he is doing this put more simply , the patient comes to the relationship primed to repeat significant relationships from the past hmm , was that more simple ? okay , if you hated your mother you might find yourself hating your therapist that 's better , right ? the concept of counter transference involves the same process when the doctor unconsciously imposes feelings and reactions from his past relationships onto the patient so , if you hated your mother , you might find yourself hating your patients it 's a complicated issue because in addition to the transference , there 's the real relationship if you hate your psychiatrist because he really is a jerk , it 's not transference and sometimes the definitions get a bit liquid i'm not a psychoanalyst if you are , please feel free to fix my simplified explanations since i 've joined blog o land aka the blogsphere , i 've been struck by the fact that so many people use their blogs as both therapy substitutes hey , if it works , i'm all for it while others use their blogs to talk about their psychotherapy sessions and their psychiatrists kind of like therapy for the therapy for example , in her blog alone just a way to get my feelings out and cope writes about the psychiatrist that pushed me over the edge taken from grand rounds now people do n't just write about their psychiatrists , their therapy sessions , the events of their day , and the associations they have to a variety of things , on their blogs , they write about it in the comment section of other people 's blogs , including right here at shrink rap over time , there develops some back forth right , foo ? and i 've come to wonder if there might be a reportable phenomena of tranference to the blog transference to the blog might be a rather confusing phenomena would the transference be to the blog itself the ultimate so called blank screen ripe for projection , or to the authors ? so does clinkshrink evoke pleasant memories of that kindly lady warden from days of old ? and what about roy , the scattered intellectual who loves the ironic do i have you right , roy ? and uses the same phrases as old aunt tillie ? i really do n't want to know what feelings i evoke , especially not after my what 's in a name post and while i'm at it , what about counter transference to the blog by the authors ? how do we feel about our regular commenters ? and if they have their own blogs , then is it transference or is it counter transference ? so , dr a , you did n't even comment on my post ranting on dr a 's blog or give an opinion on what 's in a name ? that linked to you were you ignoring me ? are you mad ? how dare you ! my uncle rupert used to do the exact same thing when i was a small child oops , no uncle rupert , but you get the point and now even i am confabulated okay , i'm just using dr a as an example he made himself an easy target when he vanished for a bit but you get the point and fat doctor , the kid 's not going to be a drug addict if you do n't make him eat asparagus , unless he would have been one anyway i do n't think my mother never made me eat stuff i did n't like maybe that 's the problem and foofoo how can you not wonder about a man named foofoo who wields the power to have have your jail term extended for months if you curse at him the ultimate mean daddy and dr crippen 's got to be old , right , with a name like dr crippen ? flea , i'm not so sure about , but i think he , turboglacier of may shrink and fade and dr a are younger than i am , but who knows shp , a bit like my little cousin oops , i'm the youngest of my cousins i'm only picking on the doctor bloggers , but rest assured , if you 're in my blog o land , i may be thinking about you and how does that make you feel ?