do you want to stop smoking ? have you tried to stop smoking before , stopped for a while and then relapsed ? becoming successful nonsmoker clinical hypnosis can be a very effective tool to help you stop smoking without the side effects of the drugs , nicotine patches and other methods used to stop smoking noticing your smoking patterns when clients come to me to become successful nonsmokers , i ask them to start by noticing and tracking their smoking patterns and triggers for each cigarette smoked in a day what was your emotional state at the time ? angry , anxious , sad , happy , etc what was going on at the time ? who were you with at the time ? where were you ? location at work , at home , walking the dog , in the car ? what is your smoking style for each cigarette ? how much of the cigarette did you smoke ? how many in a row ? of the times that you smoked , which times would be easiest to give up ? for instance , would it be easier to give up the cigarette you have with your morning coffee ? would it be more difficult to give up the cigarette that helps you to calm down when you 're angry with your supervisor ? breaking the smoking pattern at the start of treatment , i also ask clients to start by changing one particular habit involved with their smoking so , for instance , they can change their cigarette brand , change when they smoke if they usually smoke after meals , maybe they would smoke before a meal or make another change , no matter how small this is called pattern interruption and , when you 're trying to break a habit , it 's usually very effective as a way to start breaking the habitual patterns this can also work for other habits that you want to break smoking history i also want to get a smoking history during the first session when and how did you start smoking ? how long have you been smoking ? with whom do you smoke e g , spouse , smoking buddies ? are there people who are close to you that smoke ? has there been anyone close to you who got sick or died from a smoking related illness ? have you successfully quit smoking before for a while ? if so , for how long ? what worked ? what triggered the relapse ? what successful experiences have you had in breaking other habits before ? why do you want to stop ? how do you think that becoming a successful nonsmoker will affect your life ? are there certain people who will not be happy if you stop smoking smoking buddies , spouses who want to continue smoking with you ? what problems are you anticipating e g , weight gain , switching to other habits ? after i have information about your smoking triggers , smoking patterns , and smoking history , i develop an individualized plan that will be most effective for you as an individual client many people have become successful nonsmokers using clinical hypnosis if you want to become a successful nonsmoker , you could benefit from clinical hypnosis if you 've been thinking about stopping but you 've been putting it off , consider the benefits of becoming a successful nonsmoker to your health , your overall well being , the health of those around you , and your wallet cigarettes have become increasingly expensive , as i'm sure you know becoming a successful nonsmoker for more information about the health benefits of smoking cessation , visit the american cancer society website http www cancer org consider all these factors and make a decision to get help today i'm a licensed nyc psychotherapist , hypnotherapist , emdr and somatic experiencing i help clients to become successful nonsmokers to find out more about me , visit my website josephine ferraro , lcsw nyc psychotherapist to set up a consultation , feel free to call me at