dr psychobabble is a new intern in new york and she 's reading the manual on how to work her pager her pager ? they do n't just call text housestaff on their cell phones , they still need hospital pagers ? it got me thinking about my old pager back when i was an intern in new york i saw my first cell phone when i was in medical school it was in a suitcase i did n't see another one for years , and i did n't get my own until my entire training occurred in the virtually pre cell error as an intern , i was given a pager it beeped , then shouted out the number i was being paged to call the owner of the pager had to listen , it was a auditory thing , not something you could read in the bathroom , the voice of pag er woman reverberated off the tile walls in an particularly intrusive tone for months after i no longer carried the thing , i jumped when the microwave went off post traumatic pager disorder talk about an object to hate ! pcs showed up when i was in college , but few people had them a research team i worked with did , and so i learned volkswriter ? a predecessor of word fairly early mostly i remember the group panic when the computer lost an page original research document i did think it was fascinating that you could push one button and have the thing blast out of the same letter addressed to different people for my own papers , i still used a smith corona and i remember being up all night writing a paper my senior year on bulimia mostly i remember that the professor pointed out to me that i 'd misspelled bulimia and roy says sigh and wishes i were obsessional and detail oriented i ca n't imagine what college would have been like for me with internet access i may not have made it facebook might have diverted me from any goal oriented behavior how would i would have sat in class and texted my heart out oy but all the professors i was too intimidated to speak to i would have emailed them my every thought and it might have been a richer experience or not ? by med school , word processors were more widely available there was a whole bank of computers in the library and the night before a paper was due , we 'd all be there typing er , keyboarding no real internet yet , and i never had much use for the computer beyond the word processing capability i did get an answering machine in medical school , something that truly freed society from sitting by the phone waiting for a boy , a job , a residency interview a few years after i finished residency , the internet really caught on and i had no real idea clink of course , knew it all i asked her to come show me , so she comes with a laptop and plugs it in to my phone line she loaded a page and waited and waited this was not for me i wanted to try email one of her contacts was a mutual friend , a man who 'd trained with us and then moved to minnesota i sent him an email he wrote back he and his wife and two small children were coming to visit , could they stay with my family in my very small house , with our two small children for a week ? i was n't so sure about this email stuff so now we have a blog , a sometimes podcast , i have a desktop , laptop , itouch , husband has an ipad and blackberry , kids have laptops and itouches , everyone has a cell with a zillion minutes and unlimited texting tv with satellite and dvr and four remotes and a sound system there 's a bunch of digital cameras in the mix , two types of speaker docs for music , voicemails and emails listservs , and things to check out the wazoo we all have facebook pages and some days we 're friends and most days we 're not twitter me this , send me the link to that , youtube , myspace , itunes , oy when 's roy gonna make a shrink rap iphone app ? and now for announcements happy fourth of july weekend , everybody ! ! ! happy birthday , david i love you and you were great on tv this week welcome home , db , two delayed flights , days of travel and i 'll be glad to have you home and out of africa , ca n't wait to see your pics and i love you , too roy ? has anyone seen roy ? did he eat the beauty queen podcast ? ? ? and finally congratulations , clink and victor !