i got nominated again for the liebster award ! what is your favourite thing about blogging ? i think it 's a great form of expression , which otherwise you freely would n't be able to do i have also met so many people who have been through or who are going through similar situations to me , which has n't only helped me , but those around me what is your must have beauty product ? i'm not a massive fan of beauty products , but i suppose it would have to be my nivea primer it works super well and you 've got to have a solid base to build upon , right ? ! what is the most worn item in your wardrobe ? just recently , i 've thrown away quite a few of my old tops because of the move to university and the memories that they hold but , i reckon it must be my red tartan winter jacket it must be at least five years old the pockets have holes in , but i just love it too much to ever get rid of it ! favourite movie ? it has to be bend it like beckham it reminds me of my childhood and it 's definitely a happy go lucky film i could watch it forever i wish they made a second one , or at least one with the same cast would you start a youtube channel ? i would like to , but i'm not sure i have the confidence i write this blog anonymously , but i 'd like my youtube channel to be related to my blog somehow it would requite me being in the video perhaps when i finally feel comfortable showing myself , then i will think about setting up a youtube channel as it seems an opportunity full of experiences your favourite restaurant place to eat out ? this is difficult i'm not sure whether it 's a chain restaurant , but it 's called pierre 's it 's a french restaurant which does the most amazing food what is your favourite place country that you have traveled to ? i would like to say that i remember america quite well , but unfortunately i do n't my favourite place other than that is probably london or in terms of a country , italy your favourite quote ? there 's way too many that i like ! what would you like to be doing in years time ? finish my training as a lawyer or be in the police force i think it 's more towards the police force than anything else , which is something i 've wanted to do since i was seven years old but above all , happy i suppose your favourite book ? the noughts and crosses series the first book in the series is the only one that has ever made me cry do you have any pets ? no but i would love to amy xx