i really enjoyed doing the linkup last time so i thought i would do it again if you do n't know what beautiful people is it 's a monthly blog meme hosted by sky further up and further in and cait paper fury i decided to use william sigh again , if i have been talking about him too much on here i'm sorry , but in all honesty he wo n't leave me alone he pesters me day and night , he feels i abandoned him which is only half true i did go on a bit of a netflix binge , but he will have to get over it i hope , i do n't make everyone hate him i hate him , the ungrateful brat , anyway i thought i would conduct this one like an interview between him and me , because they can be fun if not tedious so i hope you all enjoy okay question number one what is your secret desire ? to have you actually work on my story , instead of making pathetic excuses and eating you are getting fat well , i see we 're off to a great start second question , what is the best and brightest moment you experience during the story ? do n't talk about me like i'm made up i find it distressing i find you distressing i am not a story 'we are all stories in the end' you just quoted that from that ridiculous show you are enamored with it 's true third question , what are the emotional places you are afraid to go to ? hey sit down , if you do n't answer it i will i mean it ! there was that time when i somewhat lost interest in living he was incredibly suicidal is that shakespeare ? you have a dazzling intellect i like this one , is there a place city room where you will never go ? i have been thrown out of lots of places you know what they are asking , stop stalling fine , burrow street that 's it , you are n't going to tell them why it was a long time ago question five , if you were permanently leaving town , what would you easily throw out ? what would you refuse to part with and why ? pretty much everything , i can always get more things show them you have a heart i 'll indulge you , i would refuse to part with belle , everything else is replaceable that 's sweet i would need a cook question number six what do you want consciously and tangibly ? those are large words for you , are you sure you understand the question i could say the same for you , well peace peace from your endless questions oh , i see , well let me answer this one william seeks love and acceptance and if he was n't an incorrigible beast he would 've found it sooner that was uncalled for , i mean really a 'beast' how original moving on , on the other hand what do you need on the emotional , subconscious level ? he needs to forgive himself i enjoy my self hate it keeps me grounded it 's triumphed only by your ego jealous , love question number eight , if you could change one thing about yourself , what would it be ? that would mean i would need to have faults snort i could give you a list , stubborn , moody , self centered , rude need i go on i thought those were some of my finer qualities are we quite done two more , what is the most humiliating event of your life ? this interview glare fine last one , what things do you turn to when you need hope ? you of course my authoress , the one who always promises hope , before you crush it and me all with a devilish grin on your face it 's tough love and character development , please stop being such a child i'm off to do violin lessons , so i hope everyone enjoys a glimpse into my sad mental state