i love getting tagged , but i am horrible at actually doing them anyone else relate also i never follow the rules or continue the tag in short i am a horrible blogger d j silver phoenix tagged me she has a great blog , go check it out ! the questions if given the choice between playing a board game and a video game , which would you choose ? video game every time growing up at the tail end of the nineties , that was a big pastime lately , i have been lost in the amazing game that is 'zelda breath of the wild' does the idea of a coastal beach or a cabin in snowy montana sound more appealing to you ? since i already live in snow drenched canada , the coastal beach sounds good are cats constantly devising a way to eat you ? without a doubt , they are eviiillll ! writing or reading ? i want to say writing , but reading i am always reading something would you rather be stuck in an elevator with your villains , or be the villain of your hero ? good one ! i would like to be stuck in an elevator , it would be equal parts humorous and terrifying also some of them are attractive they would either offer me a drink or kill me kill , they would definitely kill me what would you do if you woke up in your story world ? best question it would depend on the world , i have a few i will choose my most recent one 'falling snow' i would go to the circus , and enjoy the acts eat all the delicious food , like caramel apples give chayse a hug , after watching his fire act give snow some money and advice then probably run away with cynfael how many times have you looked at a book and put it back on the shelf ? so many times , mostly because i am broke library or bookstore ? bookstore , we have some cute used ones the nicer one has a starbucks when given the choice between batman and spiderman , who would you choose to save your main character ? this is hard , i love both probably batman , because in order to save my mc he is going to have to kill someone star wars or lord of the rings ? i love both ! if i had to choose , probably lotr the books and movies are epic it 's close though i mean star wars has han solo and kylo what name would you give your blog in an alternate universe ? castles of ink which might 've been better