as i have been battling this character for the past few months i thought having you guys interrogate him would help on the writing front also he confused the heck out of all my beta readers most of them did n't know how to take him to be honest , he likes it that way i'm not sure he will answer honestly , and for those of you who do n't know who he is he is my fae prince , who played the role of prince charming in my snow white retelling his family reigns over the northern regions and is ridiculously wealthy thanks to everyone who asked questions ! you guys are awesome ! i'm going to let him answer these questions as honestly as i can he also lies , so i would n't believe anything he says i might censor him a bit glares who do you value most in the world ? besides yourself wicked grin going straight for the heart , are we i'm not drunk enough to answer this her name was sirena that was after only one drink , that 's not actually her name is it ? silence what got you started smoking ? i started when i started drinking boredom was most likely the cause he was underage for sure ! how were you raised exactly ? in an unorthodox and amoral family with impeccably high standards now even i am curious what 's his most prominent childhood memory ? probably the day i came into my inheritance , fangs were involved a family trait , i'm told he is not a 'vampire' ! since he insist in being all vague , i will explain his family is part of the shape shifting fae , snake was their animal of choice he also ca n't turn into a full snake i do n't even know how to explain it perhaps you should n't butt in slides glass drink your juice who and where is his mother ? was not expecting that one her name is alice , and i'm not permitted to tell you our last name supposedly , it 's crucial to the plot i think that means the author has n't thought of it yet so i'm bad with last names , shoot me ! gladly ! muffled screaming as to where she is , our estate is expansive she is most likely avoiding my father and terrorizing one of the maids what do you find attractive ? this could be a trait in a person , or an object , or whatever just answer the bloody question of course you would take all the fun out of it we 're waiting it 's a hard question to answer with you glaring at me i know what you want me to say , so i'm going to have to disappoint you glaring innocence , probably because it 's so rare and confidence a beautiful face and body are also appreciated for obvious reasons so close would he rather enter a room on a fluffy pink unicorn or a fluffy pink pony ? should i take a drink every time someone asks an idiotic question ? you 've been drinking the whole time ! ah , your catching on least favorite food ? human , it 's too tough and gets stuck in the teeth he 's kidding right favorite thing to do on your day off ? glad you asked nooooo , we are not going there ! i did n't get to answer the question exactly , your catching on what makes you lose your cool ? when someone threatens anyone close to me what kind of person do you look for as a spouse ? i do n't what scares you ? nothing have you ever loved someone ? like , for no gain to yourself no backdoor scheme , just because ? with love there is always collateral damage i prefer to refrain what are your biggest fears ? again , an unfortunate question that wo n't get an answer is there anyone you really care about ? not sure i like what this question implies i do n't know what you expected what would make you truly happy ? a host of terrible and atrocious things unlimited power would be nice how very super villain of you i knew you would n't approve why do you have a more human side when the fae world is so evil and with how you must have been raised ? i do n't i appeal to people 's sympathies when it suits my needs i manipulate , it seems i have fooled you if you think that highly of me i am the monster they created me to be , i do n't claim to be more than that how were you raised exactly ? terribly what do you spend most of your time doing ? drinking , smoking , overthrowing kingdoms oh , is that all well for a weekday what is your ultimate aim in life ? to escape one bottle , that 's what it takes for you to start being honest not one i was drinking before we started exasperated sighing so , where did you get the teddy bear ? i do n't know if it 's the drink , but what is she talking about ? it was mine , he stole it i better leave him alone now hope everyone enjoyed that !