i feel kinda late to this party for some reason my blog feed was all beautiful people , not that i'm complaining i love it , but you all made me feel bad for procrastinating so here are my much anticipated answers cough so this is a linkup hosted by the world dominating cait and the equally as amazing , marvel loving sky what were your writing achievements last year ? well this is i blanked ummm i did a , word contest entry , and blog posts and not much else hides under blanket tell us about your top priority writing project for this year ? ummm it 's those stupid eyes , 'bleeding roses ' i hope you are happy william list areas you d like to work the hardest to improve this year just five editing it 's my greatest weakness rewritng something i never seem to do writing something i talk about more than i do world building i think i need to start creating more depth query actively try to get published are you participating in any writing challenges ? at the moment no , but you never know what s your critique partner beta reader situation like and do you have plans to expand this year ? i had about eight or nine beta readers last year , but besides two of them i'm not sure how many of them would be willing to read for me again i am thinking of adding a book page to this blog , and letting whoever want 's to read , whatever i'm working on so i guess , i do plan on expanding as for critique partners , shout out to jocelyn , tracey dyck , ashely g , they all edited for me , and made beautiful comments , that made me feel amazing all of my beta readers were amazing , but these three went above and beyond jocelyn all those late night skype conversations about our characters i will never forget them , especially the one when we decided that william was such a drama queen , that 'tik tok' should play whenever he walks in a room tracey you are so sweet ! you put me at ease about the contest , and boosted my confidence you also did a line edit , a line edit ! still do n't know how to thank you hopefully i can repay the favor ashely i had the biggest smile every time i read one of your emails your fangirling about aden , was the best you also gave me great editing advice that made my story feel complete and done , plus you gave me that killer idea for the end do you have plans to read any writer related books this year ? or are there specific books you want to read for research not really , but i do want to read a few marketing books pick one character you want to get to know better , and how are you going to achieve this ? it 's a toss up between these two his name is peter , he is a vampire , and dracula 's grandson or walter , a sarcastic zombie do you plan to edit or query , and what s your plan of attack ? i will do all the things , and attack everything toni morrison once said , if there s a book that you want to read , but it hasn t been written yet , then you must write it what are the books that you want to see more of , and what holes do you think need filling in the literary world ? i think we need more clean fantasy novels or just any genre really i read a lot of great books this year , that we 're well written , with amazing characters yet , there were things that made me not like them language and other content , that was way out of my comfort zone i was actually surprised at what is considered okay now for teens to read i'm guys and i still hide behind pillows when people kiss on t v for books i just skip pages i guess i will have to get writing to fill that void what do you hope to have achieved by the end of ? everything ! seriously though that would be nice i would love to have a book deal , and at least five completed books to query , and a published ebook we will see