okay i am one of those terrible people who could care less about valentine 's day , but i saw this and could n't resist doing the link up so sky further up and further in and cait paper fury do this thing , and i have never participated , but it seemed like a perfect thing to do on valentine 's day i am going to use belle and william as the lucky victims how long have they been a couple ? half a year , if you count the time we spent rebuilding the castle since i first saw her no , you were incorrigible how did they first meet ? the usual way usual you forced me to come to your castle , on my father 's life there was nothing usual about it usual , to some people who , ogres perhaps what were their first thoughts of each other ? love at first sight or you re freakishly annoying ? well as i said , i was forced to meet him so as i was a captive , i positively hated him hate is a strong word , love it 's the truth , what about you perhaps a different question no , i want to know what you thought of me i was expecting a blonde liar what do they do that most annoys each other ? you prattle constantly i do not ! your the one who hides away from rest of the world your arrogant and think you are some kind of king there it is are their personalities opposite or similar ? i think we are fairly similar , would n't you agree belle oh , am i allowed to talk now how would their lives be different without each other ? well , i for one would obviously be better off and i would still be a bloody beast what a shame that would be tsk , sarcasm is not you forte , darling are they ever embarrassed of each other ? yes , he gets bored at the market so he steals food and magics things is magics a word ? i for one have never been embarrassed of her , even when she tripped and fell into a mud puddle because she had her nose in a book you wore the mud well shush , you oaf and remove your arm does anyone disapprove of their relationship ? your mother despises me only because you insulted her i merely commented on her size , i was being honest there was no need to comment on her hips she irks me the feeling is mutual then do they see their relationship as long term leading to marriage ? yes will , where do you think our relationship is heading i thought you would leave me after you got to know me and i would have to find some wench well i have n't yet so when do you plan on marrying me , people have began to talk old abigal does n't count she talks about everyone , besides we sleep in separate wings , your choice not mine there is nothing to talk about of course we sleep in seperate wings , we 're unwed , but if you married me that would no longer be an issue when you put it like that i feel more inclined if they could plan the perfect outing together , where would they go ? william insist the we need to go to ingary to have tea with howl and sophie pendragon howl taught him most of what he knows it would be lovely , we could get a cream cake at cesari 's i hope you guys enjoyed it