better mental health care and ease of access we need to find ways to make life less difficult for people who struggle with mental illness no one s western colorado suicide prevention foundation better mental health care and ease of access we need to find ways to make life less difficult for people who struggle with mental illness no one should have to choose between needed medicine and food or shelter we all deserve to have our basic needs met with respect and acceptance mental illness is not the person 's fault any more than cancer or heart disease is this is hard for most of us to understand what we see of mental illness is just the tip of the iceberg many more people suffer silently we ca n't see mental illness , it comes to our attention when it is not treated effectively sometimes that makes us uncomfortable , and forces us to look at the results of our personal priorities mental health care and suicide prevention should be obvious public health goals medicines are getting better and better at keeping depression controlled , but the enjoyment and satisfaction of everyday life is more than just getting by emotionally suicide means ending your life on purpose suicide prevention means making living look better than dying lots of people with depression , and other mental health problems , find new lives with the right mental health care others do n't have the same opportunities suicide looks like the best or only choice for them we ca n't stop all of the hardships of their lives , but suicide prevention has to include making better mental health care more available how to help yourself and your loved ones get better mental health care learn the warning signs of depression better mental health care for australians mental health into chronic disease prevention and health promotion anxiety , suicide and other forms of mental illness and how we can suicide prevention and the eating disorder network of central florida source http imentalhealth net mental health suicide prevention through better mental health care related video about suicide prevention through better mental health care choosing life suicide prevention choosing life suicide prevention humanity healing is proud to present this video to work towards aiding suicide prevention actions being taken throughout the world by well trained suicide prevention through better mental health care commonly question about suicide prevention through better mental health care question what should i do about my clinical depression ? im ready to give up ? what can i do ? ive done everything ive been hospitalized in mental institutes for suicide prevention taken so many meds i cant even remember the names , been through so much therapy , and i dont feel better than i did since day i dont want to be hospitalized ever again , and i dont want to live like this any longer i heard smoking weed helps im about to try that is there anything i can do ? they said its all chemical for me , since i have good self esteem and dont really have social problems or problems at school im just so tired and so stressed idk why im so suicidal please help me answer alright , i have been in a similar situation with you so i can only imagine what you must be feeling right now hospital is a very stressful place but at the same time , it is best to go there because it s going to keep you safe i can tell that you are very distressed at the moment and i know that suicide seems like it makes so much easier but it s not over the past few months i have been in and out of hospital and have taken so many overdoses that it will most likely cause problems in my later years but i will tell you this , life sucks it sucks quite a bit , but there is always something to keep things going in life something to distract you keep holding on to that , i know its hard , its really hard but its worth a lot for you there must be a small voice in your head that knows that suicide isn t the right thing from experience , my attempts have caused more havoc in my life than it has before so i beg you not to do it it s ruined my relationships with people , i have lost friends and nearly my boyfriend over it so please don t do it , it will only make things worse i know you said you don t want to go to hospital but i do have a recommendation for you you probably don t live in canada but my psychiatrist recommended this site for me because you can talk to someone online www youthinbc com give it a try , seriously just type in vancouver for the city they wont call on you and get them to escort you to the hospital give that a try and smoking weed when you re depressed is going to get you addicted to that stuff ! it helps but you ll be hooked good luck question i use an anonymous name on here is that okay ? i just got a very weird reply to a question about a disorder my sister in law may have i am worried someone may have known who i am on this yahoo as i use adamsman instead of my real name if i close my yahoo account will all my yahoo questions disappear ? i have asked many mental health questions where i don t use my name or anyone else s but they are serious mental health questions about anxiety disorders , mood disorders , alcoholism , suicide prevention , etc i am worried this person who replied to my question on borderline personality disorder is afraid i am someone i am not but i don t want to post my real name on here and would rather close the account so can i erase all questions i have asked on yahoo in the past months by closing this email account or do they stay in cyber world forever ? also , how do i contact the person on yahoo who wrote back an answer where i wasn t sure if they were describing the disorder i asked about borderline personality disorder or if they were the sister in law julia using a fake account ? i thought this was a safe place to ask questions since i only use this email for politics and mental health questions and the email address is only used for that as well i don t ask the questions out of any anger but just in trying to better understand myself as i am an anxious person who has accidental annoyed others before and as a kid hurt people s feelings through gossip and alienation my mother accidentally did with her anxiety answer as you have a screen name different from your real name no one knows your real name and you are effectively anonymous you can only delete open questions yourself via the edit button resolved questions with a best answer and undecided questions in voting cannot be deleted by users and go into a database that can be used for searching they can only be deleted by yahoo ! the deletion of resolved questions with a best answer and the deletion of undecided questions in voting are covered by the yahoo ! answers team in http suggestions yahoo com detail ? pro unfortunately , yahoo ! cannot delete anything that has ended up in google and or other websites when you close your account , you will lose access to your yahoo ! id , yahoo ! mail , and profile names yahoo ! will delete your account data and settings across the yahoo ! network this means you will lose all of your content in yahoo ! mail , yahoo ! contacts , my yahoo ! , yahoo ! groups , in your yahoo ! finance portfolio , and in any other area of yahoo ! that can only be accessed with your yahoo ! id and password whatever is on the main board , in resolved q and in undecided q in voting remains in the system for ever unless it is reported by enough people whatever has ended up in google and other websites remains there for ever or indefinitely you can close your account via http help yahoo com kb index ? locale en if you simply abandon your account it will eventually be deactivated by yahoo ! as discussed below there are two possible reasons that an account can be deactivated dormant accounts are deactivated after months plus an additional months for every year the account was held an account is considered dormant if it hasn t been accessed for that interval , even if email has arrived during that time note signing in via an email client , such as microsoft outlook , mac mail , or a mobile phone mail application is not considered a valid login you must sign in to your account on a yahoo ! web site using an internet browser internet explorer , safari , firefox , chrome a violation of the yahoo ! s terms of service please read the terms of service for complete information once an account has been deactivated , it s impossible for the yahoo ! mail team to retrieve any stored information note yahoo ! premium mail accounts are protected from dormancy , and are not subject to deactivation due to inactivity please visit our yahoo ! mail plus page to learn more and sign up note that yahoo ! mail plus is not available in all regions question can i get off my yahoo questions of past months ? i just got a very weird reply to a question about a disorder my sister in law may have i am worried someone may have known who i am on this yahoo as i use adamsman instead of my real name if i close my yahoo account will all my yahoo questions disappear ? i have asked many mental health questions where i don t use my name or anyone else s but they are serious mental health questions about anxiety disorders , mood disorders , alcoholism , suicide prevention , etc i am worried this person who replied to my question on borderline personality disorder is afraid i am someone i am not but i don t want to post my real name on here and would rather close the account so can i erase all questions i have asked on yahoo in the past months by closing this email account or do they stay in cyber world forever ? also , how do i contact the person on yahoo who wrote back an answer where i wasn t sure if they were describing the disorder i asked about borderline personality disorder or if they were the sister in law julia using a fake account ? i thought this was a safe place to ask questions since i only use this email for politics and mental health questions and the email address is only used for that as well i don t ask the questions out of any anger but just in trying to better understand myself as i am an anxious person who has accidental annoyed others before and as a kid hurt people s feelings through gossip and alienation my mother accidentally did with her anxiety answer as you have a screen name different from your real name no one knows your real name and you are effectively anonymous you can only delete open questions yourself via the edit button resolved questions with a best answer and undecided questions in voting cannot be deleted by users and go into a database that can be used for searching they can only be deleted by yahoo ! the deletion of resolved questions with a best answer and the deletion of undecided questions in voting are covered by the yahoo ! answers team in http suggestions yahoo com detail ? pro unfortunately , yahoo ! cannot delete anything that has ended up in google and or other websites when you close your account , you will lose access to your yahoo ! id , yahoo ! mail , and profile names yahoo ! will delete your account data and settings across the yahoo ! network this means you will lose all of your content in yahoo ! mail , yahoo ! contacts , my yahoo ! , yahoo ! groups , in your yahoo ! finance portfolio , and in any other area of yahoo ! that can only be accessed with your yahoo ! id and password whatever is on the main board , in resolved q and in undecided q in voting remains in the system for ever unless it is reported by enough people whatever has ended up in google and other websites remains there for ever or indefinitely you can close your account via http help yahoo com kb index ? locale en if you simply abandon your account it will eventually be deactivated by yahoo ! as discussed below there are two possible reasons that an account can be deactivated dormant accounts are deactivated after months plus an additional months for every year the account was held an account is considered dormant if it hasn t been accessed for that interval , even if email has arrived during that time note signing in via an email client , such as microsoft outlook , mac mail , or a mobile phone mail application is not considered a valid login you must sign in to your account on a yahoo ! web site using an internet browser internet explorer , safari , firefox , chrome a violation of the yahoo ! s terms of service please read the terms of service for complete information once an account has been deactivated , it s impossible for the yahoo ! mail team to retrieve any stored information note yahoo ! premium mail accounts are protected from dormancy , and are not subject to deactivation due to inactivity please visit our yahoo ! mail plus page to learn more and sign up note that yahoo ! mail plus is not available in all regions