addiction an internet porn obsession drives a common family man into divorce , the horrors of incest , and a life he had not planned for exiled from hi anxiety and prescription drug addiction rehab international an internet porn obsession drives a common family man into divorce , the horrors of incest , and a life he had not planned for exiled from his former world he escapes into oblivion until years later the daughter he had abused tracks him down the young woman has her own addictions and troubles father , daughter and a revolver meet and destinies change an internet porn obsession drives a common family man into divorce , the horrors of incest , and a life he had not planned for exiled from his former world he escapes into oblivion until years later the daughter he had abused tracks him down the young woman has her own addictions and troubles father , daughter and a revolver meet and destinies change anxiety addiction abuse by dental work is out now and available for anxiety disorder and substance addiction screening test women social anxiety social phobia test stress dealing with anger addiction and rage addiction source http imentalhealth net mental health disorders substance related disorders addiction related video about addiction types of anti anxiety drugs abused types of anti anxiety drugs abused drugrehabcenter com types of anti anxiety drugs abused discover the best treatment options for you call our toll free recovery hotline at addiction commonly question about addiction question addiction ? ? would u consider something that u crave for night and day an addiction ? ? what if u loose sleep when u feed the addiction and can t even tell the difference cuz ur just looking foreward to the next fix ? ? how about calling in sick just so u can do this ? ? if u consider these signs of addiction plz help with ideas of ways to control the addiction or beat it answer hello , it certainly sounds as if this might be an addiction only you can decide that , though if you need help , you should look at addiction resources in your yellow pages there are many different ways to get support , everything from the traditional narcotics or alcoholics anonymous to harm reduction programs if we are talking about a substance , which it sounds like i wish you well ! just as a tip , please use the spelling check feature on here i found your message very hard to read you might also find it difficult to be taken seriously if you spell in slang a lot on here , just as an fyi question addiction ? i just saw somebody with over , points ! would you consider this an addiction ? answer hmmm in a joking way i would consider it an addiction but its whatever floats their boat really hey probably just enjoy themselves on here question addiction ? i have an issue i get easily addicted all my friends think i m a freak because i m like obsessed with michelle pfeiffer is it normal why do they think i m a freak just because i ve seen almost all of her movies read her biographies and watched all of her talk show apperences do you think i m a freak whats wrong with me answer nothing is wrong w you you happen to like a person are just learning all you can about her people study many things , many subjects , have high esteem for certain people , places things there s not a thing wrong w you lots of people have their idols in movie stars , musical groups etc etc you are no different than they are just ignore them for heavens sake you re allowed to like whomever you choose i ll bet they have their favorites too if they really tho t about it ! do your thing enjoy what you re doing it sure could be worse , i can think of many worse addictions ! have fun , be free to have fun