anxiety , phobias , and panic anxiety , phobias , panic was published in warner trade paperback in , netting over , copies i anxiety , panic phobias the london hypnotherapy partnership anxiety , phobias , panic was published in warner trade paperback in , netting over , copies it has been back to press times reneau peurifoy has specialized in anxiety related problems since and was selected to present his treatment approach at the national conferences on phobias and related anxiety disorders , sponsored by massachusetts general hospital and harvard medical school anxiety , phobias , and panic reneau z peurifoy amazon anxiety , phobias , and panic by reneau z peurifoy reviews anxiety , phobias and panic disorders clinical guidelines fast facts anxiety , panic and phobias , second edition source http imentalhealth net mental health disorders anxiety anxiety phobias and panic related video about anxiety , phobias , and panic anxiety phobias and panic part anxiety phobias and panic part pete youtube com real life part one youtube com anxiety , phobias , and panic commonly question about anxiety , phobias , and panic question what is the best medication for anxiety panic phobias ? need to have something that doesn t cause nausea etc as i have ibs and don t want to aggravate it answer i took diazipan , it calmed me , but now knowing life better i would try councilling or support groups rather than medication medication to me now is a quick fix , it does not heal you question does biofeedback or hypnosis have any effect on phobias , anxiety , panic , or depression ? the meds just take the endge away , therapy can t penetrate my severely irrational mind so i ve heard rumors about biofeedback and hypnosis do these actually help ? are there any other things to help ? answer yes ! ! ! just make sure to eliminate fears sure there are alternatives but mental help such as hypnosis etc really is better faster if done right wanna know what it is ? theta healing question can an acupunturist or narturopathic doctor helps me with anxiety , panic attacks , phobias and depression ? answer you ll do better with some cognitive and physical techniques rather than herbs and such meditation and yoga have been used for centuries to reduce stress and anxiety exercise is mandatory not only for mental health but to maintain optimum physical health you are body mind , the mind works best when the body is maintained in good condition do you know the source of your depression ? have you sought counseling for it ?