prweb may , could we be expecting too much from people who might not be pre disposed to niceness ? a study reveals that niceness and narciss managing perfectionism how to deal with being a perfectionist prweb may , could we be expecting too much from people who might not be pre disposed to niceness ? a study reveals that niceness and narcissism might be in the genes http bit ly iiiqxe there is dna associated with traits that relate to being giving , caring , and responsible this discovery is affiliated with what dr bonnie talks about in make up do n't break up , where a person who 's loving and caring often has two specific hormones in their genes oxytocin the cuddle hormone and vasopressin the risk taking hormone should we be more patient with people who are not so nice ? asks dr bonnie she says that this discovery cannot be a cop out it 's not ok to give a narcissist a free pass , but it does help to understand where they may be coming from , she says it 's possible narcissism is n't as much the person 's fault , directly , as we may have thought , dr bonnie suggests when someone is dealing with a person they suspect is a narcissist , dr bonnie suggests asking these questions do they turn the activities or conversations back to themselves ? do they feel entitled ? are they looking to receive great gifts but do n't put as much thought into what to give other people ? do they shut down and ignore other people ? for people with a narcissist in their life , dr bonnie suggests skills that she teaches for empathy but also firmness and decisiveness she typically prescribes the brush with death for patients who are dealing with a narcissist who needs to be snapped out of taking the other person for granted it 's the only thing that will bring a narcissist to their knees they will start missing the other person and stop taking them for granted it alerts the narcissist if it 's a viable relationship do n't feel sorry for them , stay the course it often takes a person like this four to six weeks to snap out of it ! unless there is movement or change remember , it 's important not to waver when the person pleads their case do n't listen to words , look at the movement cautions dr bonnie do n't engage in a power struggle , advises dr bonnie and do lower expectations do n't attempt to discuss the issue with them , because you do n't want to talk a relationship to death just do n't give them too much attention and do n't expect too much from left samantha cooney , bridgett shaw , and garrett beatty source http imentalhealth net mental health disorders personality disorders is narcissism in the genes dr bonnie weighs in related video about is narcissism in the genes ? dr bonnie weighs in back on enbrel part back on enbrel part gone into remission for months and this condition because i carry the hla b anti gene i have a combination many arthritis pointing toward is narcissism in the genes ? dr bonnie weighs in