check out these mental health images mental health room renovations image by jordon the lighthouse is adding nine mental health rooms to be used by t mental health anxiety images check out these mental health images mental health room renovations image by jordon the lighthouse is adding nine mental health rooms to be used by the saskatoon health region pictures of mental anxiety mental health in the uk social anxiety self help mental anxiety photos chronic disease for good health fact book , chapter heading source http imentalhealth net mental health nice mental health photos related video about nice mental health photos ocd and me may is mental health month ocd and me may is mental health month so may is mental health month obsessive compulsive disorder ocd is an anxiety disorder and is characterized by recurrent unwanted thoughts nice mental health photos commonly question about nice mental health photos question my mental health stability ? help please ? my self esteem at a low i m not an attention seeker please don t call me one briefly some backround info i m chubby i have been for a few years i m and my family isn t so nice i , ve battled sever depression and cutting disorder but at some point in life i always felt preety i knew i was fat and other things but i knew that if i got contacts and lost some weight i could be preety i always thought i would be very preety after this now for about a year now i haven t felt preety at all i look in the mirror and hate what i see i know you thinki m just one of those typical girls who are seeking for attention and what not or that i m just a teen with mood swings i m not so i looked up how to feel preety and things like that but none of it s working hears some photos of me from a while back i basically look the same http www facebook com ! photo php ? fbid set a type theater or a fully body last thanksgiving http www facebook com ! photo php ? fbid set a type theater or a nicer one http www facebook com media set ? set a type ! photo php ? fbid set a type theater answer cutting comes from depression , and it sounds like you still are depressed you need to get help from a counselor they can steer you in the right direction of course , all this depends on whether or not you want to get better and feel better about yourself you have to take care of what s on the inside first , before you can make whats on the outside better but you can ! question i live on my own and have done for a year , i feel lonely all the time and crave company to end my solitude ? but because of my anxiety problems and panic and low self worth and anger rage problems , its not easy to do anything about this i waiting for a mental health evaluation from a psych plus i live in a very noisy area with alot of antisocial behaviour so i struggle to be at peace and tranquility plus im being rejected and ignored all the time on myspace by every girl i leave a nice message for , my photos are on myspace so they can see wat i look like and it feels like a kick in the teeth , and a conspiracy the way no one is approaching me some girl yesteday called me desperate , and i hate to admit thats exactley how i feel as anyone else been in a predicament like this ? answer trust me , from my own experience , girls smell desperation and lack of self confidence that s the problem ! as soon as you fall in love hard for one single girl , or get a really interesting hobby , anything that causes you to stop paying special attention to everyone you meet , they will be all over you just be confident , be yourself , and remember that you should look for someone that suits your personality and you deserve , not to anything that has long hair and a vagina as soon as you raise your standards and stop trying to please every girl around you , they will start to see you in a more interesting light until then , get a really cool hobby , or a pet question general trouble ? hi i ve had a very on off relationship with the camera for a while now i m a very self conscious person , and i do suffer from a lot of mental health issues unfortunately about months ago i started weight lifting , infact i ve been lifting for about months in total so far but only four months really seriously sessions are very intense , and my general health is good but i do suffer from stress , its extremely severe and i wonder sometimes if im working out ok like i said the sessions are intense but sometimes drop to two days a week is that cool ? in that time a lot of people have made some really nice comments on how ive progressed however i still don t believe them for some reason when i take photos , i look really skinny i dont know what to think sometimes i think i have muscle dysmorphia , but then i remind myself surely if i was actually progressingie putting on weight then i would be happy myself what do you think ? also , i look in the mirror constantly times daily answer you need to seek help , and ask shorter questions