by eyewashdesign a golden depression is a serious infliction that affects almost million americans every year it s a proven illness although overcome depression will help you fight depression and beat it in time by eyewashdesign a golden depression is a serious infliction that affects almost million americans every year it 's a proven illness although it is defined as a mental illness this is no reflection on the personal attributes of the inflicted depression can affect anyone it 's path has no pattern it will affect the rich as well as the poor race or religion are n't important strength or weakness is n't a factor with this disease the age old stereotype that has been associated with a mental illness must be ignored the suffering associated with this disease will only get worse without treatment ignoring the signs will not make it disappear if a person does n't seek medical attention , the disease becomes worse until it dominates their entire life depression can result from a number of sources it 's not a matter of a day or two of confusion or sadness , this disease is much more months or even years are the time frame in which depression plays depression at its worse can lead one to the act of suicide remorse is often a feeling associated with the early stages it 's possible that the disease will steal away the enjoyment you used to have for favorite hobbies you can experience loneliness and despair you may feel like a failure at life and cannot see where the future is going to get any better your entire personality can change as time passes you will feel the affects at work , at school and at home it will upset your sleep habits and cause your anxiety to grow depression has many causes stress can be a major factor stress itself has many causes such as losing a friend or being told you have a serious medical condition it can be passed on genetically it can be caused by abuse rather it be physical , emotional or sexual looking at the monthly bills might cause it there is so much stress in the world today to compete and satisfy those in our society this condition can be serious there is assistance for people who look to be treated studies have shown that only a third of that million americans that are affected by depression will ask for assistance it 's important that you look for assistance , or if a loved one is affected find help for them help for depression how to get rid of depression popular self help books for anxiety , depression and trauma help with anxiety and depression techniques for anxiety now help you get better anxiety disorders over anxiety and depression source http imentalhealth net mental health disorders depression depression help get help with depression related video about depression help get help with depression medical marijuana helps epileptic seizures depression and anxiety medical marijuana helps epileptic seizures depression and anxiety transcription to follow hello my name is john heneska and i am a medical marijuana patient i am years old and have been a patient for about depression help get help with depression commonly question about depression help get help with depression question how can i get help for my depression without my parents finding out ? ? ? ? please help me ! ? i am always sad , tired and i cut my wrists at least once a day now i m not stupid and i know i m depressed and i want to get help so i stop cutting my wrists the problem is that if my parents find out they will never treat me the same way they don t even believe depression is a thing , and i they knew i cut my wrists they d probably just think i m mental what can i do ? i m answer i used to be like that , my parents never found out , im now and living life at my best you need to really stop with the wrist cutting , totally not worth it ! you need to hang out with friends , go out places , be social , dont be home in a shadow , most importantly , smile more often if smiling is hard , pretend to smile , pretend to have fun , soon enough , you wont be pretending and you actually will see a change for the better im so sorry for what youre going through , thinking no one could understand , but a lot of people go through this , and youre never alone , remember that i wish you the best sources myself question depression help online ? lately i have been feeling really depressed and i have been cutting i want to know if i can get any help online where i can talk to someone ? answer i have been in your possion and it sucks but i go on sixbillionsecrets chat and compassionpit sometimes it s hard to find people who help but you will eventually i promise because people care i know me saying don t cut isn t going to stop you but please try really hard not too i also recommend leaving your house go outside ! and if you want im always here to listen just message me ! maybe i can help since i have been there before and i have seen plenty of people hit rock bottom i hope you get better ! ! just try to get out of your own mind ! sources me and my life ! hope i helped ! good luck sources sixbillionsecrets com chat and compassionpit question i feel like i m slipping back into depression , help ? from around th to th grade i was really depressed from having no friends and the ones i had were awful to me that caused me to cut myself and i really thought about killing myself my mom found out and i had to stop cutting myself but i never got help summer of th grade all my friends turned on me and i was even more depressed but somewhat relieved when th grade came i made friends that actually care about me except one really toxic one she s really cold and pushes me around and makes me feel like crap up till last night this was all normal until i decided to not do what she said which caused her to flip out on me i m afraid i ll lose all my friends again and i m getting really sad about this i get sad really easily and its killing me i want to get my razor back out and start cutting again i may be overreacting but i m a really nervous case and i dont take this very well it hit me today and i ve been just crying and i don t know what to do please help ? ! ? answer tel your friends about this what she s doing to u before she gets all ur friends to hate u