naturally , one out of our three days lauren and i spent in london last weekend , was dedicated to shopping ! i plan on doing a separate lifestyle post detailing everything that i got up to on my recent trip to london cambridge , but for now , i thought i 'd let you take a peek at the goodies i picked up while i was in the uk 's capital first stop was topshop where i picked up this white long line blazer oversize is going to be huge this season so i definitely wanted in on the trend ! white is such a universal colour and easily goes with anything so i know i'm going to the wear out of it next up we went to zara where i splashed out a bit and bought some tartan trousers hitting the nail on the head with the punk trend here ! , this delicate lightweight blouse , perfect for everyday wear , and then lastly , my number one find of the trip these gorgeous miu miu esque leather flats shown above ugh so pretty ! ! my favourite purchase of the trip was definitely from jo malone i have been dying to get my hands on some goodies from them for some while now and i finally gave in and bought the blackberry and bay cologne i opted for the smaller size juuuust to make sure i 'd be able to take it back on the plane without any hassle i get so paranoid about these things ! so i'm going to need to make sure i use it sparingly ! it 's categorized as a fruity perfume , although it 's not sickly sweet like you might imagine , it 's warm , aromatic and has a gorgeous dark fruitiness to it and it 's lasting power is insane ! ! a couple of spritzes and it lasts me the full day ! take a bow jo malone , you are sensational ! the last notable product i picked up , was a new lipstick from mac oh mac , how can i resist you ! i really wanted a new , darker lipstick for autumn winter as most of the lipsticks i own are very light , mostly pinkish shades i was torn between dark skies and cyber , but in the end decided to go for dark skies as i felt cyber was just slightly too dark the colour is so so beautiful ! this rich plum shade is perfect as we approach the colder months i am obsessed ! ! amongst all that , i also picked up a cheap eyebrow pencil from maybelline and some goodies from murdock for the boyf ! and thats that ! a sensible amount of purchases i think , especially since i usually go overboard and am laden down with luggage on the way home from all the spending ! related posts suzyblue things i 've learned in years suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner s