oh my gosh i am in love ! ! ! i 've always been a huge fan of urban decay in fact , i'm almost sure that the first eyeshadow palette i ever owned was their deluxe eyeshadow box ! since i am a huge lover of nude and neutral toned eyeshadows , i feel like the naked palettes were created especially for me ! all palettes are excellently pieced together , with the shades that complement each other carefully arranged side by side , which makes life so much easier for the girls that maybe are n't as sure as to which colours to wear together ! naked is all about the rose gold tones the palette is a mix of matte , frost and shimmer shades , starting with a gorgeous creamy pink colour strange all the way to the deepest shade in the palette a black shadow with iridescent red shimmers blackheart these colours are formulated to suit any skin tone and as they are all still very neutral , they will go with any eye colour these shadows are so pigmented ! it 's crazy ! ! the swatches above are literally the result of two swipes from my finger ! the colours are so easily blendable too , they glide on to the eyelid like silk ! i am so so impressed and i think this may actually be my favourite naked palette yet ! as you can see from the pictures above , for todays look , since i had work , i opted to go super natural keeping it purely matte shades on my eyes however , you could easily create a full on i'm going out and want to look shit hot look from this nifty little palette ! i used strange on my lid and brow bone , limit as my transition shade and nooner on my crease very subtle but still gives my eyes that extra special something ! i'm not sure what else to say about naked it 's definitely a in my opinion and my new go to palette ! i cannot wait to start experimenting with different colour combinations and i 'll be sure to post up pictures of my favourite looks i create has anyone else bought naked yet ? what are your thoughts ? related posts things i 've learned in years suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue suzyblue