where have i been ? ! ? ! ? ! ! ? ! ? ! ? ok i know i 've been a horrendous blogger for the past months but i have good reason ! as you may or may not know i have been interning down in london at kurt geiger for the past weeks and the internet connection where i was staying was an absolute joke and i just did n't have the patience for it ! so instead of mini weekly round ups like i was planning on posting , you 're getting one mammoth post now that i am home and have amazing , fast speed internet ! my experience down in london was times better than i ever thought it would be and the day i had to board my flight back to scotland was a sad one ! it was n't until coming home and hearing so , how was it ? by every single member of my family and friends that i realised how much fun i actually had ! getting the opportunity to work for kurt geiger was incredible , and my job was pretty exciting too ! i was in charge of sample requests , meaning if a magazine or stylist needed some kg 's , i was your gal ! i'm not going to lie , i did have to pinch myself a few times when replying to emails from the likes of vogue and elle i mean i was talking to vogue ! ! ! my favourite week of all had to be the week of the brits i was never off the phone , talking to everyone and anyone who wanted their celebrity in kurt geiger i spoke to one directions stylist and even sent shoes to beyonce madness ! ! other daily duties involved sorting out all the press coverage we received the office was so relaxed that i could enjoy a wee cup of tea whilst flicking through pretty much every single glossy magazine available on the market to see if we had been featured it barely felt like working ! another highlight was sneaking down to the showroom taking a peak at all of next seasons collection it looks fabulous ! ! i definitely had to restrain myself from trying everything on ! amidst liaising with vogue , trying on shoes and flicking through magazines , i did actually have to do big girl jobs like competitive analysis and compiling coverage reports , but with music always playing in the office and an endless supply of tea and snacks from the vending machine , it was n't so bad ! weekends in the capital were perfect ! with most of my closest friends all down in london doing placements as well , there was never a dull moment ! all of us living in the same building was a bonus because there was n't one single moment when i felt lonely which is something i imagined i would in such a big city ! we made the most of our days off by spending them together as a group shopping , exploring and finding amazing places to eat ! brick lane market and shoreditch were definitely my favourite places i could spend hours milling around the stalls , eating great food , and finding fun little cocktail bars to relax in in the evenings ! i could go on and on about how amazing my experience was and i 'd give everything to go back and do it all again ! chrissy , carley , asya , sara , pascale if you 're reading this , thanks so much again for this incredible opportunity and thank you so much for my leaving gift ! i 've received so many compliments ! ! i hope you 've all enjoyed reading about my time in london , i'm so sad its over but am so grateful to have done what i 've done ! i vlogged the whole time i was down there so click the link below to check out week 's adventures ! did a lot of haulin' in ldn so expect a ton of reviews outfit posts other girly ramblings over the next few weeks ! stay classy , related posts fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue things i 've learned in years suzyblue my evening skincare routine suzyblue