so , i 've been a super bad blogger lately , but i 've had exams and coursework and all that boring stuff that has to take priority in life boo ! but i'm back and i thought what better way to get the ball rolling than to share some exciting things that have been happening so far in ! firstly , if you follow me on any other form of social media , you may know i went through a bit of a hair change ! although i love being blonde , i wanted to try something a little different for the new year ! so i'm now ginger ? well , not entirely , i'm not exactly sure what colour my hair is ! sort of browny , coppery , gingery , blondy , ombre y ? it took a bit of getting used to at first , but i think i'm finally starting to like it ! i think it looks a lot softer and a lot more natural now that i'm in rd year of university , everything is times harder than it was when i was a baby first year ! ! this semester has turned out to be the most challenging so far and has caused many tears , breakdowns and the weekly that 's it ! i'm dropping out ! tantrums ! however , all of the hard work and slaving away in the library has paid off as last week i got some pretty exciting news it is a requirement as part of my course ba hons fashion management that all students undertake a placement in rd year we have a placement officer within the uni that helps us contact companies and try to arrange placements internships however , being the strong , independent woman that i am , i decided to go it alone and try to organise my own placement with the company i currently work for and lo and behold , i did it ! i 've managed to bag myself an internship in the pr department at kurt geiger 's head office down in london ! in london ! ! so at the end of this month , i 'll be packing up my life and moving down to the capital for a total of weeks ! i am so over the moon and so thankful to kg for this opportunity ! i am honestly still in shock and so overwhelmed at the fact i am making my dreams come true yuck that was so cheesy but it had to be said ! so yeah , thats the goss ! i will be updating my blog regularly and perhaps even trying my hand at some vlogging while down having lots of adventures in ldn ! ! but for now i'm off to eat some soup and watch one direction 's movie because i have the worst cold on the face of the planet and my nose is so red i genuinely could be rudolph ! ! related posts i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue things i 've learned in years suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue suzyblue