christmas is my favourite time of the year and yes , i am that girl who always wants to start decorating and getting into the christmas spirit ridiculously early ! ! last week , our flat caught the craft bug , we 've been busy bee 's making and creating our own christmas decorations ! we got most of our ideas from bethany mota 's roomspiration video , although we put our own little twist on each of the decorations something as simple as changing your bedding can make a huge difference to your room and definitely gives it more of a festive feel i switched up my regular pink floral bedding with this red and navy fairisle print set from primark the reindeer throw and the red and white pillows were also from primark i think this is a great , easy , inexpensive way to give your room a more christmassy feel ! accessories such as fairy lights and candles can also add that little something extra to your room i picked up these white fairy lights from primark for , and most of the candles i have in my room are from the yankee christmas collection divine ! ! lastly , i placed some miniature baubles on my bedside table which i picked up from my local craft store for i think ! just because i thought it looked cute and christmassy ! the first thing we decided to make were these super adorable christmas jars again , really easy , really cheap everything we bought to make these were picked up from our local craft store all you need is a clear glass jar , and then any christmassy type garland decorations to fill it ! we opted for gold leaves , sparkly red berries , pine needles glittery stars and fake snow chuck 'em all in your jar , give it a shake , pop the lid on , tie a bow around it et voila ! you 're done ! how easy was that ? ! we also made some christmas themed frames all you need is a deep box frame , felt lettering , christmas paper and christmas decorations to fill your frame with open up the frame , glue the christmas paper to the inside back panel of the frame , place the decorations of your choice on the inside of the glass , put the frame back together and then stick a phrase of your choice on the front of the glass with the lettering and thats it ! super simple but really effective ! so those are my ideas to spice up your room for christmas i hope you enjoyed reading and if you try out any of these tips , be sure to let me know how you get on ! related posts fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue things i 've learned in years suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue