so the past week has been absolutely crazy ! ! rewind to last wednesday , i had my first exam and then straight after it finished , i travelled the hour journey back home i knew the next few days were going to be super busy and stressful so i started off the evening pretty much how i always do when i go home with a nice hot bubble bath ! on returning home from working on the snooker in sheffield , my dad brought me back a gift which will most definitely be well used a cute little pink egg box filled with bath bombs ! anyone who knows me will know i adore bath bombs , bath oils , bubble bars , the lot ! so this was a lovely surprise ! the bath bombs themselves are lovely , they each have their own individual scent and left my skin feeling super moisturised unfortunately , these were purchased at a craft market , so unless you happen to live in sheffield , these may be slightly hard to get your hands on ! thursday consisted of visiting family and studying hard for saturday 's impending exam ! a pretty quiet day , but one in which i needed before the weekend 's madness ! friday the th was a day i had been looking forward to for a while one of my besties joanne , was showcasing all of her final designs for a collection she had to create as part of her end of year college work and i was modelling for her , yay ! the day started off with a trip to the hairdressers to get my hair done , then it was back to the college for costume fittings , show rehearsals , makeup and last minute exam cramming ! the day turned out to be a huge success , everyone 's designs looked fabulous and all of the models looked great ! after the show finished around pm , i quickly hopped in the car and my lovely mum drove me the hour drive back up to aberdeen so i could make my am exam the next morning ! hugs to you mum , what a trooper ! saturday was the day of my last exam and i think the only thing that got me through it was the fact that at pm , i would be free from uni , coursework and exams for a whole months ! summer summer suuuummmerr ! ! ! the exam went badly , but the rest of the day made up for it ! i spent the afternoon with my mum , and was treated to some lovely post exam goodies , and then the evening was spent celebrating the start of summer with all of my fashion girls so yeah , thats my crazy week over with and summer has officially begun ! hallelujah ! i hope everyone is having a great week so far until next time , stay classy suz x related posts a year in pictures suzyblue my evening skincare routine suzyblue fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue things i 've learned in years suz