well , what a busy , busy week it 's been ! sadly , i was ill for most of it which meant i had to miss one of my favourite events of the year halloween i have to admit , being all alone in the flat while every man and his dog was out partying in aberdeen , and then seeing all the pictures on facebook the next day was pretty soul destroying but hey , this means that sometime soon my flatmates and i will have to organise a fancy dress party at our place so i can wear my costume i guess you could say there 's a silver lining in the cloud ! a highlight of the week though was definitely saturday ! as you probably already know , for university we have to complete a photo shoot fashion spread for this years rgu fashion management magazine and our group had a ball ! ! a few last minute complications meant that i had to step up to the plate and model for our group , which naturally , i was extremely nervous about to begin with , but it turned out to be a whole lot of fun and more ! our photographers were amazing and completely captured the theme and look we were going for ! here is a wee behind the scenes look at our shipwrecked shoot freezing my tiny self off for an hour and a half on a very cold afternoon on the beach was totally worth it because the pictures turned out great ! who wants a sneaky peak ? okay , thats your lot for now ! so after a long busy week , there was nothing i was looking forward to more than visiting home for a whole days , to relax and spend some quality time with my family if only things were that simple ! due to a train derailment between montrose and arbroath on sunday morning , all aberdeen edinburgh trains were cancelled , which meant my trip home had to be delayed by a day sad times managing to book a cheap train home last night first class on east coast , may i add for this afternoon , waiting an extra day to go home did n't seem that bad at all if only things were that simple ! on awakening this morning to find that there were still no trains running south of montrose , i got myself in a state wondering if i would ever get home for this week ! luckily , scotrail were running buses to dundee train station to replace the cancelled trains , so after a long bus ride , further followed by a long train ride to stirling , nothing made me happier than seeing my dad 's smiling face waiting to pick me up at the station after a long day of traveling i am finally home and blogging from my cozy living room , surrounded by family bliss being home for the week means i 'll have a ton of time to post lots of fashion y related things on my blog so watch this space ! until next time , stay classy , suz x related posts fotd mini tutorial kylie jenner suzyblue a year in pictures suzyblue my evening skincare routine suzyblue i want what she's wearing croatian inspiration suzyblue things i 've learned in years suz