where do i start when it comes to my history of exercise ? ! i m one of the few adults left who has never visited the gym , not once i hated pe at school and my hatred of sport and anything competitive went from there ironically , i studied at loughborough university , well known for its sporting achievements during my second year , i lived in a small block within a hall of residence with others , one was a canoeist , two played handball for england , there was a rugby player , an athlete who competed for england in the m , a footballer who played for her county , trainee pe teachers , a hockey player and then there was me i hope i remembered all that correctly , it was a few years ago i think i went swimming maybe times in my years there , and for about weeks i toyed with the idea of being a cheerleader my love of american teenage novels being acted out , remember sweet valley high ? ! anyway , you get the idea , i was the least active person on campus ! this post also contains pictures from my first blog shoot does n't that sound fancy ! trying to look natural whilst a camera is pointed at me is impossible ! ! i almost always ended up laughing or blinking i gave up and posed at one point or went for pics taken from behind ! i'm including those i'm most happy with in this post and then adding some outtakes at the end because this blog is n't about showing i'm perfect , it 's about showing i'm not i'm sticking to my pledge that every photo on here will be taken by me or feature me as a child , my parents took us walking every weekend so i always liked to walk in my early twenties , me and my then housemate used to walk everywhere we had just moved to a city , had no car and weren t fond of buses so we would even walk to the cinema and back , that was minutes away i would say that was the fittest i have ever been disclaimer i never dress like this to walk but thought it would look good in the pics , professional hey ! i have on occasion joined an aerobics class yes it was a long time ago , does anyone ever do aerobics now ? ! i only ever lasted a few sessions as i said in my post on healthy eating , i have always been lucky enough to be thin so i didn t have much motivation to exercise i regret it now since being diagnosed with cfs at the end of over doing it has left me exhausted , achy , unable to control my temperature and foggy headed as well as more emotional amongst other things i therefore reacted by doing less , normal human nature i would imagine sadly , i am now less fit than ever and i just think it is making it even harder for my already weak body to manage normal activity levels i intend this year to build my fitness back up i will take it slowly , managing your activity is vital with cfs as you can so easily do too much , i don t want that to leave me scared to do anything though on friday i start a course of gym based physio i also am trying to get out times a week and walk i always walk when i m doing the school run too , it s not far but it all helps when i m ready i want to add in a swim each week too i want the goals i set to be achievable so this is a positive process , i have a habit of aiming too high , failing quickly and giving up so i must start small this time and build on each achievement as i go my two children both got bikes from santa and have both mastered riding them so walking whilst they ride is a fun way to get some gentle exercise too as i have said before i intend this to be the year i face my fears and improve my mental and physical health i will chart my journey through this blog to motivate me , keep me on track and hopefully inspire others to do the same outtakes hope they make you giggle suggested posts welcome to my blog why am i writing a blog