welcome to week six of my diary series , starting monday th april i ve had only positive feedback on these diaries so far so hopefully that means you re all enjoying them i will still aim to improve them each week for a start , i currently write this from memory , making notes during the week would probably be a better idea ! i also need to learn how to edit my pictures insert laughing emoji ! blogging let s talk blog let s get the negative out of the way quickly , i only managed two posts during this week and last and my weekly page views have halved compared to the two weeks before them i haven t tweeted as much to promote it this week though so i know that will have impacted plus , as i always say , i am over the moon with my stats anyway ! i went to two more blogging events this week i can t believe how many i have been invited to ! i am starting to see the same faces at some of them now and it s so lovely getting to know everyone i feel so lucky ! the first event was the menu launch of a restaurant in the city centre of leicester it s a mexican restaurant called bodega and it was amazing ! the second event was organised by the skincare brand kiehl s and this too was so much fun it was my first beauty event and i was disappointed to learn we don t get many beauty events in leicester i loved it and will be doing a post on this one too i have so many posts to write and no time to write them ! ! the school holidays aren t helping the cause ! i am also currently running my first blog giveaway in conjunction with a brand , this is also very exciting , see the details here i haven t had many entries yet and there are prizes up for grabs so take a chance ! life as i said this week has been the school holidays and i am off work so i have had plenty of time with my two munchkins , annie and freddie if i am honest i sometimes i find the prospect of the school holidays daunting , i worry they will be bored and end up grumpy ! i needn t have worried , we had a wonderful week we went to soft play , the cinema , the park , into town to see the queen and to a fun fair we also did artwork at home and got into the garden , briefly ! they got on with each other almost all week and even helped me around the house ! i only slightly blackmailed them the promise of screen time generally does the trick seeing the queen was fun , she was in leicester for the maundy thursday service i haven t seen her in real life before and so i didn t mind at all when annie asked to go we waited for over an hour and a half , the kids were very good , they only moaned a little and only for the last half an hour so i can t knock them for that we knew she would be driven past so it would be brief however i was slightly disappointed by just how quickly they went by considering how many people were waiting and how long we had waited for we were lucky though to have a good view and i got a picture on my phone i often wonder about life now and if we all miss out on the special moments whilst trying to capture them on our phones i knew i had to choose between seeing the queen through my eyes or my phone screen ! i worried i would regret choosing my phone but as fate would have it i captured a lovely photo you can see both the queen and prince phillip and better still you can see annie and freddie s faces in the reflection of the queen s car i couldn t have planned it ! best of all is seeing the smile of joy on annie s face , that i almost certainly would have missed if i had been looking at the queen rather than taking the picture so , on this occasion i made the right choice i ve not shared the picture as i am currently not sharing pictures of the kid s faces on the blog they both say they are happy for me to do so if i change my mind though so we shall see health with all the school holiday fun and the two blog events i was struggling with my cfs by the weekend again it seems to be a pattern currently and not one that impresses my husband , which i understand i just sadly can t manage it all i am just grateful that i got through the week helped by my lovely in laws giving me a break on wednesday when they took the kids for the day i have been anxious at times my depression is still under control though i would like to think about trying to come off my medication soon food who can eat healthily in the school holidays ? ! especially the easter ones ? ! oops ! exercise my energy all went on the time with the kids and that is the most fun exercise for me remember to come back for next week s diary and there should be at least two further posts if you don t want to miss one , then subscribe to the blog by email thank you kelly x suggested posts cajun and fajita spice mixes week diary how i am tackling my anxiety and fear of judgement