so here we are , my second blog post i still can t quite believe i am a blogger now ! i was so pleased and overwhelmed by how many page views my first post received and by how many supportive messages i received from friends , family and via social media so many of you enjoyed my post and so many have admired my bravery although part of why i am doing this is to face my fear of judgement i guess it never occurred to me just how brave that was sitting behind a screen over the christmas break , during which i ve barely seen anyone , made it seem easy enough reality is starting to hit now though and it s rather overwhelming even though i know all my friends and family can access the blog it still feels somewhat anonymous as i haven t had to talk face to face to anyone about it yet ! that will be the really challenging bit , i must fight my embarrassment and face being the centre of attention for a few minutes tomorrow s school run will be odd , wondering who might have read it i posted the link to facebook publicly so friends of friends may possibly have read it too whilst unlikely , it s at least possible that even a stranger i pass in town could have read it and will know my name and know about my life ok i really didn t think this through ! ! prime example , on new year s day after publishing my first post we spent the day with my sister in law and her family they aren t on facebook so my plan was to tell them about the blog in person , i couldn t do it i didn t know how to bring it up now i m stuck between wanting to text them about it and worrying they will wonder why i didn t mention it sooner ! much as all this scares me i still feel very motivated to continue as i believe it will be good for me as previously mentioned i want the blog to act as a motivator for the changes i want to make in life i also want it to be a hobby , a passion , an outlet , a source of fun and hopefully a source of entertainment and inspiration for others over the past year , i have gotten into watching youtube and reading blogs and that given me the inspiration to do this reading through other people s blogs today though i suddenly felt pressurised as their content is so professional will mine be as good ? will i have enough time to post regular content ? will i have enough ideas ? i just must keep reminding myself that this is all new and that i am not a trained writer and that i am a very , very amateur photographer improving my photography skills and having a creative outlet are two of my other main reasons for doing this i adore photos , i still get mine printed and put them in albums in date order yes really , although i m about months behind like i said i have great intentions but am poorly motivated ! you ll have to put up with random old pictures until i sort out taking some new ones though ! so , having a blog scares me , overwhelms me , puts pressure on me , makes me scared to go out in public and is probably a nuts idea but between you and me , the overriding feelings i get when i think about my blog are pride and excitement so , screw it , i m going to do it and see where this journey takes me and if you do see me out , please do talk to me about it ! also , if you have any thoughts on this post please leave me a comment below thank you for reading look out for more posts soon suggested posts tackling my anxiety and fear of judgement my journey to healthy eating