as those of you who read my blog regularly will know , i am currently trying to eat healthy i m doing this to improve my well being as i hope in turn this will help me better manage my health it s also a great thing to do anyway good food helps your body function at its best it s common sense that eating well will make us look and feel healthier what exactly does eating healthy mean nowadays though ? if you read my post on my healthy eating journey you will know that last year i completed the candida diet it really was the most challenging thing i had ever done it sounds mad to say that about food doesn t it but it s true the candida diet is an exclusion diet designed to clear a yeast infection i wasn t certain i had a yeast infection and in hindsight i m sure i didn t but i wanted to rule it out as the cause of my cfs symptoms it excludes anything that is or can be turned into sugar no sugar , maple syrup , honey , fruit , potatoes , rice , pasta , carrots , sweet potatoes , peas , sweetcorn , chick peas etc it is tough to do everything must be cooked from scratch so you ll spend a lot of time in the kitchen ! i managed it for two months without cheating at all i wouldn t say i felt better during that two months however i reintroduced foods very gradually and during the third month i felt improvements so why did i stop ? ! many reasons but going on holiday was up there with the biggest offender so , the candida diet is good but impossible to manage and almost certainly it makes too many exclusions to be good long term so , what is a manageable healthy diet plan that may help me ? well based on the main rule of the candida diet i would think cutting out sugar would be a good start i have been trying that for the past couple of months but if you read my weekly diaries you know i m failing miserably i m failing partly as i was too strict with my rules i m also struggling to commit to it as it s all basically guesswork and there are no guarantees of success right so we cut out sugar but what types ? i think most people agree carrots should be ok ! fruit is generally allowed too , even in the strictest of the sugar exclusions books i have , i quit sugar in this book the only sweeteners allowed are fruit , rice malt syrup and stevia stevia and rice malt syrup don t contain fructose fruit does but the added benefits make it worthwhile on this plan , you can eat everything else except processed food of course i think no processed food is the only obvious rule , every healthy eating guru agrees with that one so , that is my rule one rule two , no fructose except fruit ? well not according to deliciously ella , the hemsley sisters and davina mccall they say simply cutting out refined sugars is enough so , maple syrup , honey , dates etc are fine but is natural sugar really any better than refined sugar ? deliciously ella certainly thinks so , her plan has cured her of a chronic condition ella is vegan though so her plan is more challenging to follow than i quit sugar although it s also tastier thanks to the natural sugars ella also avoids gluten the hemsley sisters eat meat and animal products but they don t have grains davina simply avoids refined sugar and limits gluten so , if i try and follow all their advice it s going to be as limiting as the candida diet , maybe even more so these are just the plans i have books on there is also the paleo diet , fodmap diet and i m sure others to consider see why i am confused ? ! i know from experience a diet change will benefit me i just don t know where the hell to start ? ! ! it surely shouldn t be this difficult to navigate ? ! as for the old rules , throw them out of the window ! fat is now ok , if it s good fats if you re not vegan you can even enjoy cream without any guilt as it is sugar free ! ! years ago , i would have laughed my head off if you suggested i could manage to go vegan now thanks to deliciously ella i feel sure i could manage it i would miss things , eating out would be a nightmare and cooking a family meal all but impossible yet if it were just me , i could do it ella s recipes are so tasty and i have enjoyed each one i have tried but will it help me or is it unnecessarily extreme ? i adore good food , i always have i love eating out and finding new restaurants to enjoy on holiday the food makes or breaks it for me imagine never enjoying cadburys chocolate again or a good afternoon tea or a croissant or any of the treats i love but imagine feeling better ? less fatigued , more energy , better skin etc that would be worth it i just need someone to tell me the rules i can commit to it , i just need to know i ve followed the right advice any ideas ? how do i eat healthy ? thank you for reading kelly x please note this is only my understanding of the advice given in the books mentioned suggested posts my favourite fruit free green smoothie cinnamon and coconut granola