this week i visited primark and picked up a few items i m loving i ve often visited primark for bits for the kids but rarely for myself i was pleasantly surprised when going around the women s section just how great the clothes are then there is the homeware , they are doing great with that they do make up and beauty stuff now too , how did i not know this ? i could have bought so much ! i was very good though and stuck to a few bits read on for what i bought and what i wish i had bought ! some of my readers are new to blogging so let me first explain what a haul is ! it s basically a shopping spree you ll find them in blogs and on youtube and they cover a variety of shops and products my favourites are clothes hauls and homeware hauls mine today is a primark haul so now for the fun bit , what did i buy ! i got off to a fantastic start i needed a pyjama top to match a pair of trousers i already have i wanted a long sleeve one as i hate to be cold in bed whilst browsing a sale rail i found this one for yes , you read that right , primark is great for stocking up on basics so i got a pair of tights , they are black and have a sweet pattern through them i also got some footie socks the ones that remain hidden in your shoes they are black and are designed for sport so are breathable good for the walks i intend to start going on the tights were and the socks for pairs , bargain i then discovered the beauty section i found some exfoliator gloves and was excited as i ve wanted to try them for a while but didn t want to spend too much these were gloves for just bit of an aside but when using exfoliator gloves do you wear just one or a pair ? i d have thought one would be sufficient ? anyway , back to beauty , i also picked up a bottle of face primer spray i love face sprays and i also thought this would be good for wetting my beauty blender before applying foundation , at only i can justify using that way ! then it was up to homeware , i could have bought so much i was very restrained and settled for a throw and a candle the throw is so lovely and soft and will be perfect thrown over the back of my sofa for when i m feeling cold as i often do i know my children will love snuggling under it too at only it was wonderful value and they do them in an array of different colours the candle i have had before and i loved it they do a variety of scents , this one is vanilla a personal favourite scent of mine the last one i had burnt well and completely evenly which for a cheap candle is amazing so many candles i have that are more expensive tunnel and you waste so much of it so , at only i highly recommend these so , those were all my purchases now for the stuff i wish i had bought ! first up was a pair of ripped skinny jeans sadly , they didn t have my size available they were perfect they were ripped but had a square of material sown in behind each rip so you don t actually show any skin i love the ripped jean look but don t want to have my knees hanging out so this is the perfect solution i found a picture of them for you i will be trying to get them soon i am bad at spontaneous clothes shopping , bad i just can t do it ! i must want it , need it , try it , think about it , check everywhere else for a better one etc etc the problem with this approach is you often then get shopper s regret i have that now about a certain t shirt i saw and i am praying they will still have it when i go back it was a band t shirt , another trend i currently like the problem with me and this trend is that i feel i should like the band and be familiar with their music , otherwise i feel a fraud ! as my music taste is rather , shall we say pop based , that makes finding an acceptably cool band t shirt rather tricky primark have a bon jovi one i love bon jovi , i have albums and everything ! it was perfect so why didn t i buy it ? ! i m an idiot is why and i m too damn sensible pray for me it s there when i go back ! i couldn t find a picture of it but hopefully you ll see me in it ! thank you for reading get yourself to primark soon by the way this isn t sponsored and i bought everything myself , obviously kelly x suggested posts styling a floral blouse my fashion loves and fears