just in time for christmas , the masked amhp s extensive team of tech guys have completed the brand new , shiny and indispensable masked amhp app ! one of the masked amhp 's tech guys crammed with useful tools for the busy approved mental health professional , you won t know how you ever lived without it ! the masked amhp app comes preloaded with a fully searchable database consisting of the mental health act , the code of practice and the reference guide , as well as all the associated statutory instruments ! wahey ! the masked amhp app also has a fully searchable database of all the relevant case law associated with the mha and the human rights act ! woohoo ! but that s only the beginning ! once you ve downloaded the masked amhp app onto your mobile device it will solve all your amhp problems ! section or section ? you ll never be stumped by this conundrum again ! just point your mobile device at the patient , and it ll automatically identify which section you need to use the masked amhp app will then autocomplete the section forms and wirelessly transfer them to the nearest printer ! mha or mca ? never fear making an error in discerning whether or not the mental capacity act might be preferable ! the masked amhp app will make the decision for you ! is the patient mad or not ? simply point your mobile device at the patient , and the masked amhp app will automatically identify whether or not the patient is mentally disordered ! warning still in beta stage who is the nearest relative ? simply input a list of suspects into your mobile device , and the masked amhp app will instantly identify who the nearest relative is , and will then autocomplete the section form with a cast iron reason why it was impracticable to consult them ! guaranteed to stand up in court ! where s the nearest hospital bed ? using advanced gps technology , the masked amhp app can instantly locate a vacant bed anywhere in england or wales ! even the ones the bed managers are hiding ! problems getting a section approved doctor ? the masked amhp app can not only identify which local sec doctors are available , but will also text them with an irresistible reason why they need to attend ! even when they re on holiday , or simply can t be arsed ! tormented by ambulance delays ? the masked amhp app can hack into your local ambulance trust s system and place your request at the top of their priority list ! simply input an address and postcode and an ambulance is guaranteed to turn up within minutes ! all this and even more ! nurse amhp s , ot amhp s , social worker amhp s who s the best ? x factor or strictly come dancing ? you won t know how you ever lived without the masked amhp app ! what people have said about the masked amhp app now why didn t i think of that ? mark zuckerberg now why didn t i think of that ? bill gates now why didn t i think of that ? richard jones