it 's march the days are getting longer spring is just around the corner a young man 's thoughts turn to the mental health act son daddy , what do you do for a job ? dad i m an amhp , son son a lamp ? do you light up ? dad no , son , i m an amhp an approved mental health professional son an aluminium metal shelf partition ? dad no , an approved mental health professional i have the power to detain people in hospital under the mental health act son is that a special power ? dad i suppose it is son like spiderman he can climb up the side of buildings and squirt spider webs out of his wrists ! are you like spiderman ? dad i must say , being able to squirt spider webs out of my wrists would be useful sometimes , but no , i can t do that son so can you climb up the side of buildings ? dad no , but i can get police officers to force open someone s door with the right warrant which is nearly as awesome son i don t think so , daddy you re not really like spiderman at all , are you ? dad no , i m not , son i only have the powers given me under the mental health act by being approved i haven t been bitten by a radioactive spider son what is the mental health sack , daddy ? dad takes deep breath the mental health act was written by the government to provide a legal framework for the treatment of people with a mental disorder son what is a mental disorder , daddy ? dad a mental disorder is when there s something wrong with your head son like a bump , daddy ? dad not exactly although a bad bump on the head could give you a mental disorder it s more like feeling very , very sad , or having funny thoughts son funny thoughts , daddy ? like jokes ? knock knock ! dad who s there ? son peter ! dad peter who ? son peter bananas ! dad peter bananas ? peter bananas ? son it s funny , daddy it s a joke dad no , not like jokes it s more like having beliefs that other people find strange son like wanting to eat broccoli ? ech ! i hate broccoli ! dad no , not like that like thinking that you re related to the queen son but if you re prince harry , you are related to the queen is prince harry mentally disordered ? dad not as far as i know like thinking you re related to the queen when you aren t or thinking that god is controlling your breathing son but god does control everything he s everywhere and knows everything even when you put a bogie on susan s back at school dad did you do that ? son no , no , daddy that s just an example so what do you do for your job , daddy ? dad well , let s see here s a little story son i like stories , daddy ! dad once upon a time there was a man called derek his doctor was very worried about him , because derek had been doing strange things son what sort of strange things , daddy ? dad erm , well he has been spending lots of money he has been buying hundreds of plastic ducks and keeps them in his living room , all around the walls he has told the doctor that the duck man wants to take him to duck land , where he will have to float around on a lake all day and night son he s a funny man , isn t he ? dad well , the doctor thinks that derek is mentally disordered and needs to be in hospital so he asks daddy to see derek and arrange for him to go into hospital son i see ! you re like an ambulance driver ! you take people to hospital ! dad no , no , son i m not like an ambulance driver although i do use ambulances sometimes my job is to go and see people like derek to see if they re mentally disordered and to decide whether or not they need to go into hospital after all , derek might have a good reason for buying lots of plastic ducks son he might have a big bath , mightn t he , daddy ? dad yes , he might but he might be mentally disordered if derek wants to go to hospital , then there s no problem but if i think he needs to go , but derek doesn t , then i can section him and make them go into hospital , even if he doesn t want to son do you make people do things they don t want to do ? like when i don t want to eat my broccoli ? are you a bad person , daddy ? dad no , i m not a bad person not really i try not to be i try to do what is the best for somebody like derek although they don t always like it son when they go into hospital , do they make them better ? dad they try to they give them tablets to make the funny thoughts go away son do the tablets always work ? dad usually often sometimes look , why don t i read you a story from one of your story books ? son all right derek wasn t a very good story can i have numpty the sloth gets sectioned ? dad not tonight that s a bit too much like derek how about the famous five appear to be mentally disordered in a public place ? son all right , then