i even made my own cake ! this is the masked amhp s th post ! when i created this blog back in march , i had no idea whether or not i would be able to sustain writing it beyond a few months would i run out of things to write about ? would i simply get bored ? would i be able to keep to my initial remit , which was to inform and entertain ? would anyone actually read the blog ? well , i ve now managed to keep thinking of things to write about for over years and people do seem to read , and even sometimes enjoy , the blog when blogger started to provide me with statistics , back in july , i was gratified to discover that around people were accessing the blog every month that was nearly people every day ! i am now getting around , page views a month , and the readership seems to be continuing to grow month on month one of the things i love about blogging is the feedback you receive from readers i ve had many interesting , thought provoking and encouraging comments , from professionals , other bloggers and , importantly , from many service users these comments have helped me to think that writing the blog has been worthwhile , and even useful to others i d particularly like to mention cb here , who used to write the awesome fightingmonsters blog not only was she my first follower , but her early comments encouraged me to continue by the way , i find the negative and argumentative comments on the blog just as stimulating in their own way i have even used some as a springboard for discussing significant issues hello , monica ! and i ve even had a comment from someone who could only be richard jones himself , the author of the mental health act manual , the bible of amhp s everywhere it s like suddenly discovering that god himself is actually listening to you as you say your prayers at bedtime and has something to say about it i have had encouragement from other estimable blogs , including the sadly defunct mental nurse , as well as the world in mentalists and the not so big society it s always much appreciated when a post is recommended by others i was very flattered when guardian select took an interest in the blog and included it in their directory , and in the last year i have had a number of pieces published in the guardian s social care network about a year ago i set up the masked amhp s facebook group i had no idea what , if anything would come from it over that time , the group has evolved into an open forum for discussion about a wide range of issues relating to mental health the membership is gratifyingly cosmopolitan and eclectic , ranging from amhp s and trainee amhp s through to bloggers , academics and importantly , service users we even have a police officer and a chaplain ! the group has developed into a unique opportunity for people from all sides to come together and discuss how mental health , and the mental health act , impacts on their personal and professional lives at the last count , there were members so why not join ? shameless plug so what is next for the masked amhp ? should i write a book , and if so , what about ? i ve been thinking hard about this do readers have any preferences for the types of posts i write , or have suggestions for future posts ? should i start tweeting ? i d be delighted to hear from you in the meantime , i ll have to see whether i have the inspiration , or the energy , to write another hundred posts after all , i m getting pretty ancient by now thank you all for reading