the masked amhp is doing stand up ! he s got a special guest spot on the amazing sufsws stand up for social workers tour i ll be at the cambridge gig on thursday th december ! i'm more scared than if i was standing at luis suarez 's door with a sec warrant ! stand up for social workers ! robert james theatre , comberton cambridge thursday th december birmingham , leeds and liverpool sold out reading looks to be going the same way ! plus extra shows in december added it s what the doctor ordered ! eddie o hara independent sw consultant one of the best nights out we ve had as a team t braithwaite , team leader , wolverhampton this was as good as live at the apollo keepsafe , uk wow ! ! ! ! ! ! ! i gould get your online tickets for this excellent night of fun putting the social back into social work ! ! ! online booking only fund raising event for the social workers benevolent trust for booking information click here a night of comedy and music for social workers , colleagues , relatives and friends jim mcgrath and debstar debstar is an experienced aussie social worker who combines stand up comedy with song , loose facts , stereotype and ever so slight exaggeration to tackle issues such as structural oppression , office politics and presents her version of what is the greatest risk to social work today ? she will do this in a less than lady like way that should bring a much needed smile to your face but absolutely wo n't compromise her or you social care registration my jaws were hurting from laughing brilliant ! very funny , clever stuff what a great night out our team is still talking about it jim mcgrath is a social worker and trainer jim has returned to stand up after a two year break he has performed his eclectic view on topics such as social work experience , adolescents , racism , men s health and years of marriage , to audiences throughout the uk and ireland from plymouth to aberdeen , dublin to derry and has supported some of ireland s best comedians including kevin mcaleer , tim mcgarry , colin murphy and micky bartlett a great performance laugh out loud material torquay gazette i don t know about his stand up routine but his files were always a joke ! ! every line manger he s had social workers , those who work with social workers or live with them should come along book early to avoid disappointment by clicking on the link below booking details for cambridge click here for rest of the uk tour dates click here