blog reader i say , masked amhp , you ve been promising to write a post about how to identify the nearest relative of a patient detained under the mental health act for the last couple of years isn t it time you got round to it ? masked amhp do i really have to ? br i m sure we d all appreciate it ma can t i write about a history of mental health legislation instead ? br save it for a future post i want to know about nearest relatives ! ma oh , very well then what do you want to know exactly ? br i want you to describe the process of identifying the nearest relative within the meaning of the mental health act but so that i can understand it ma you want the moon on a stick , don t you ? don t you know that richard jones devotes pages of very small print in the th edition of the mental health act manual to the identification of the nearest relative ? available new from amazon for only ! br does he ? how interesting but i m sure you can do it in fewer pages and stop advertising ma ok then , i ll have a go but you may get a headache br i ve got some solpadol available from all good chemists ! ma you ll need them and you stop advertising as well let s see , where to start ? well , you need to understand right from the beginning that the next of kin is not necessarily the same as the nearest relative you can choose your next of kin , but your nearest relative i m going to use the term nr from now on , as i m fed up of typing nearest relative over and over again , is set in stone sort of sec of the mha defines the nearest relative , although to be honest , chapter of the reference guide to the mental health act explains it more clearly by the way , did you see how i ve mastered hyperlinks in my blog ? br stop showing off and get on with it ma takes deep breath here goes then the nr is the first person you encounter in the following list husband , wife or civil partner son or daughter father or mother brother or sister grandparent grandchild uncle or aunt nephew or niece br that wasn t too bad i thought it was going to be much more difficult ma i ve only just begun there s rather more any relative has to be at least years of age to count as the nr unless they are a parent unlikely , i d have thought or a husband , wife , civil partner , or living with the patient for at least months as the husband , wife or civil partner oh , and adoptive children count as natural children then , of course , to quote from the act any relationship of the half blood shall be treated as a relationship of the whole blood , and an illegitimate person shall be treated as the legitimate child of a his mother , and b if his father has parental responsibility for him within the meaning of section of the children act , his father and of course , you have to remember that despite that , a relation of the whole blood will take precedence over the same relation of the half blood br that sounds a bit harry potterish ma don t be sarcastic but since you ve mentioned it , applying these rules , who is harry potter s nr ? br well , let s see , both his parents are dead he lives with the dursleys , who we are told are his only living relatives so it must be his uncle , vernon ? ma nope vernon is not a blood relative his aunt , petunia , is the sister of lily potter , harry s deceased mother she s definitely over , so petunia dursley is harry potter s nr within the meaning of the mha br well , i m glad we ve got that straight do you think harry s likely to need sectioning ? ma well , he thinks he has special powers , he sees all sorts of strange things that other people can t see , he hears voices other people can t hear what do you think ? br i think you re beginning to spoil the magic of the harry potter series for me ma right , back to the nr if there is more than one person who comes in the same place in the list , then the eldest takes precedence , regardless of gender br ok , so i don t have a partner , and i don t have any children , but i have a mother and father that would mean that the elder of the two would be my nr ma that s right ! and if you didn t have any surviving parents , but you had several brothers and sisters , the eldest would be your nr if there was no one higher up in the list and so on but there are exceptions br of course there are always exceptions ma a relative who lives with , or cares for , the patient , takes precedence over any other relatives so if a patient lived with their youngest daughter , then the daughter would count over any other children , as long as she was over if you are married or in a civil partnership , but separated or abandoned by your partner , then that person cannot count as your nearest relative oh , and if a relative permanently lives abroad , then they don t count br what if you can t find anyone on the list ? ma well , if you have lived with someone for at least years , but not as a husband , wife , or same sex partner , then they would count so if you were a lodger , your landlady might count as nr if you had no other living relatives and finally , the nr can delegate someone else to act as the patient s nr br is that basically it , then ? ma well , i won t go in to people detained under part iii of the mha , that is , via the criminal justice system , as they don t legally have nr s br why not ? ma no idea anyway , let s give you a little test here s a real case where i had to reach a decision about who was the nr fanny was years old she lived alone she had been married , but had divorced many years previously she did not have any children she had or brothers and sisters who lived in the area the oldest of these lives in spain one brother lived nearby and used to visit her several times a week and help her with shopping and so on her father had had a son before he married her mother this half brother was older than any of her other siblings , but he lived many miles away and had only ever seen his sister a few times who is fanny s nr ? br well , the oldest of her siblings , regardless of contact ? that would be the half brother ma that s what i thought too so i contacted him , but he was ill and didn t want to undertake the role of nr so he appointed his daughter to act as nr , and i consulted her , and put her name on the section papers but i was wrong br incredulously the masked amhp was wrong ? ma yes i d forgotten two things the first was that relatives of the full blood take precedence over relatives of the half blood the second was that a relative who was a carer of the patient took precedence over other relatives so the brother who lived nearby and helped her with shopping was her actual nr and i used him the next time i had to section her br that s a pretty serious mistake didn t you get in trouble ? ma well , to the best of my knowledge and belief i had identified the half brother you only have to show that you have taken reasonable steps to establish the nr i rectified it next time even the masked amhp can make mistakes , ok ? br so that s all there is to know about establishing the nr for the purposes of the mha ? ma would you like to know about children subject to care orders ? the nr rules don t apply to them oh , and the nr of a patient can change over time if they get married , for instance , or if a child reaches the age of oh , and br that s quite enough for one post , thank you nice to talk to you ma nice to talk to you , too i hope you ll drop in again sometime , when i might tell you all about the history of mental health legislation br i can t wait