what s that , sooty ? you want to know what to do if a patient s nearest relative unreasonably objects to making an application for admission under sec mental health act ? well , sooty , that s an interesting question let s just put the question in context for our readers , shall we ? let s say that sweep became mentally ill and needed to go into hospital for treatment but sweep doesn t want to go into hospital , so an amhp has to section him what s that , sooty ? sweep s completely mental anyway ? that s not a nice thing to say , is it , boys and girls ? anyway , let s get back to our example the amhp has to consult with sweep s nearest relative if he wants to detain him under sec for treatment but the nearest relative can object to this if that is the case , then the amhp cannot proceed with the sec what s that , sooty ? is harry sweep s nearest relative ? that s a good question , sooty sooty s full of good questions today , isn t he , readers ? well , harry can t be sweep s nearest relative because harry is a human being and sweep is a glove puppet no , sooty , richard can t be sweep s nr for the same reason no , it doesn t matter how often he puts his hand up sweep s backside , he will never be his nr within the meaning of the act remember , the nearest relative is the nearest relative is the nearest relative anyway , this is just a hypothetical situation , sooty what s that , sooty ? what does hypothetical mean ? well , it means that it s not real , it s made up what s that , sooty ? am i made up ? no , sooty , the masked amhp is a real person , but he s got a pretend name anyway , this is where displacement comes in you see , sooty , if the amhp thought that sweep s nr was being unreasonable in not allowing the amhp to section him , the amhp can apply for the nr to be displaced there are lots of different things in the mental health act , sooty it s a bit like the ingredients in a cake when you mix them all up and cook them , then a nice big act comes out at the end what s that , sooty ? you d like to make a nice lemon meringue pie ? well , you can get on with that while i carry on explaining to all the boys and girls about displacing the nr i ll tell , you what , i ll hold the bowl while you put the ingredients in and mix them all together so , the amhp has to go to court and see the judge in order to get the nr displaced the amhp should ask the patient if they have any preferences , otherwise the amhp can nominate someone , such as the local amhp lead , or the director of adult services , to act as the patient s nr now careful squeezing that lemon , sooty ouch , it s gone right in my eye ! now where was i ? oh yes , the court can then appoint that person if they are satisfied that the nr has acted unreasonably they can even appoint someone else , anyone they like , in fact what are you doing with that whisk , sooty ? you ve got egg white on my tie ! so , has that answered your question , sooty ? now careful , sooty , try and keep the whipped egg white and the icing sugar in the bowl my , that s nice and light , isn t it , sooty ? what s that , sooty , it s so light you can lift the whole bowl over my head ? watch out , sooty , you re going to spill it ooooooh ! sooty , look what you ve done now ! you ve emptied the bowl all over my head ! it s dripping off my ears ! oh , sooty ! you are a naughty bear ! i m going to have to get cleaned up now ! bye bye , readers bye bye !