fabio well , here we are on a fine day , not a cloud in the sky the masked amhp s sitting at his desk in the amhp office , chewing at the bit to take a referral it s a quiet day so far , isn t it , adrian , but who knows what could be just around the corner ? adrian that s right , fabio , but look ! just as he s settling back to read the paper fabio it looks like the guardian to me , adrian adrian i believe you re correct there , fabio but the masked amhp s mobile s now ringing , he s picking it up and he s taking notes ! fabio just look at the skill there ! he s asking pertinent questions at the same time as he s madly scribbling on his notepad ! what a consummate professional ! adrian and just look at the ease with which he writes down all the salient details ! from here it looks like it s a referral from the home treatment team it s for a woman in her s called dolores , with a long history of schizophrenia , who s been refusing her depot injection home treatment have been trying to persuade her to take oral medication fabio looks like quetiapine to me adrian i do believe you re correct there , fabio hard to tell , the masked amhp s handwriting leaves something to be desired ! fabio no one s perfect , not even the masked amhp ! adrian never a truer word , fabio , never a truer word anyway , she s refusing that too , and becoming increasingly psychotic ! fabio looks like the masked amhp s going to have to go out on this one , adrian ! adrian you re right there , fabio ! and just look at that ! a quick browse through his contact list and he s got two sec doctors on board ! what a mover ! fabio that was a bit of luck there adrian luck s got nothing to do with it ! the masked amhp knows all the sec doctors who re wanting to build swimming pools or saving up for a bmw series fabio and they ll never turn down a chance for a quick quid adrian you re not wrong there , fabio fabio that s all well and good , but what about a bed ? he s ringing the bed managers , but he doesn t look like a happy bunny ! adrian he s muttering something about the nearest bed being in harrogate ! fabio phew ! that s miles away ! he won t get the local ambulance service to transport a patient there ! adrian he ll have to get a private ambulance for that little job fabio the masked amhp s trust must have deep pockets , adrian adrian either that , or they ve got no common sense fabio a bit close to the knuckle there , adrian adrian but seriously , doesn t this put paid to any mental health act action today ? there s no point in going out to assess if there s no bed , surely ? fabio au contraire , adrian the masked amhp s legally bound to make an assessment and don t call me shirley adrian well here we are outside the patient s house nice little suburb , by the look of it but look at that ! there s a broken window , and the tv s out on the front lawn ! doesn t look good to me , fabio ! fabio but ever the professional , the masked amhp s calmly sitting it out , waiting for the doctors to arrive adrian perhaps we can turn to our guest expert in the studio for an opinion tell me , richard , what do you think he ll go for here ? section or section ? richard jones for it is he of course , we mustn t jump the gun an amhp will always have to consider the least restrictive option before resorting to a formal application under the mental health act but as a rule of thumb section if you don t know the patient , or there s been a significant change in presentation requiring a fresh assessment , and section if the patient is known and the appropriate treatment has been decided but i d probably tend to favour a section if the patient s in the community , especially in these circumstances of course , the new draft code adrian thanks for that richard but look at what s going on ! the doctors have arrived , they ve all had a bit of a chinwag in the masked amhp s car , and now they re going to the front door ! fabio what are the odds on the masked amhp getting through the door , do you suppose , adrian ? adrian well , judging from past performance , he can be a nifty little mover in a tight spot fabio there s dolores , she s opened the door and the masked amhp is engaging her in conversation ! adrian and look at that foot in the door , stepping forward and they re in ! fabio amazing bit of footwork from old masky there adrian now they re in , he s telling her the purpose of the visit fabio ever the professional oh and look ! she s asked him for his id and he s showing her his card ! adrian is that a yellow card , fabio ? fabio no , it s just a trick of the light adrian well , dolores is cooperating with the assessment so far , she s even telling them about the voices she s been hearing telling her not to take her medication ! fabio it s going smoothly so far , but it could still be an early bath for the masked amhp adrian well i didn t expect that ! she s saying she ll agree to an informal admission ! isn t that offside ? fabio don t get me started , adrian ! adrian well they ve concluded the assessment now it s decision time what do you think richard section , section , or oh , and they ve gone with the informal admission fabio bit risky that , don t you think ? what if she changes her mind ? adrian i think old masky s weighed it all up , and he s gone for the less restrictive option fabio but couldn t he have gone with home treatment ? adrian you re forgetting they ve already tried home treatment and it didn t work so that only leaves informal admission , or detention under the act fabio masky s on the phone to the bed managers and he s smiling ! it can only mean one thing ! they ve used a leave bed and got her into a local hospital adrian that s cause for celebration , all right ! fabio well , they think it s all over it is now !