although activity on this blog has been very quiet over the past few months , i 've been an antsy ant over at healthyplace each week i have posted two shiny , tingly adhd blog entries of such extreme excitement that i'm tuckered out just thinking about them never mind the two audio clips a month of me talking while doing something at am is there no better way to define excitement ? ! i ca n't think of any well , maybe running around the top of mount timpanogas with a lightning rod during a thunderstorm while screaming missed me ! might be just a bit more exciting , but not by much hey , i even recorded my thoughts in an empty parking lot it was thrilling stuff i do have to admit that the videos have been devoid of high entertainment value , unless you happen to enjoy train wrecks i have mastered many things in my life task management , tecktonic , the rubik 's cube , personal hygiene but feeling comfortable in front of a camera has not been one of them fortunately for you , i have only printed articles to share with you today i like both of these articles and think you 'll like them as well please pop on over to healthyplace and give them a read adhd goofs stand up and take a bow where i celebrate the adhd talent of screwing things up so badly that god ca n't even straighten them out i was even taken to task by a reader for contributing to adhd stigma yes , indeed laughing at myself is ok , but do n't you dare do it ! adult adhd cognitive behaviorial therapy proven effective after a recent row with a freshly pressed adhd author in the comments section here and over at hp , i was thrilled to announce the findings of a recent study on cognitive behaviorial therapy cbt i wish they discovered that if cbt is done in tandem with donut therapy it will produce weight loss , but just my luck they found the opposite results what they did find was that cbt is an effective treatment for adult adhd there is a large force of well meaning , but bullying , voices in the mental health industry that push medication alone as the only viable solution for dealing with depression , adhd , etc however , psychmeds have been clinically proven to be ineffective for certain percentages of the population taking them if you , like me , are in that percentage , how are you to find help if the only option being offered is take meds ! take meds ! take meds ! ! ! this study has shown that cbt techniques helped alleviate adhd symptoms that psych meds alone could not address , they saw a reduction of adhd symptoms using cbt techniques , and that the success of the cbt training lasted nine months past the initial three month training although the use of psych meds with cbt was emphasized as the total solution , the study 's findings on the efficacy of cbt self regulatory techniques was encouraging and worthy of pursuit they were quite excited about their findings , and i am , too cbt has been a life saver for me you can read more about it in the link follow me on twitter for my adhd escapades at splinteredmind or my novel writing project over at douglascootey and if you 're a glutton for punishment you can friend me on facebook as well you might also like adhd accomplishments of stunning import and variety blogging part one has blogging plateaud ? addaboy ! tips to help you not forget things like i did forgot to mention my addaboy ! blogs you 'd think i had linkwithin