pm hello , tuesday ! it s time to write before you turn into wensday just for your information , i won t be writing these posts on sundays and yesterday s excuse for not writing was an umbilical hernia i m patiently awaiting surgery for next month and moved a heavy box absentmindedly how could i forget that i had a hernia ? well , i certainly remembered in a hurry once i injured myself you know those core exercises done on exercise balls ? the kind that were all the rage in the aughts ? i always found them rather lightweight i had no idea how much i used my abs to sit and type until i couldn t do it yesterday very painful but who cares about my pain , right ? you re here to read about how i manage writing a book while dealing with depression or adhd tonight i write a hoary tale of how one moment of adhd can come back to haunt us months later i discovered to my horror that i had no idea where all my graphics were for my latest book s blog post i spent yesterday and today scouring my hard drive in search for them i couldn t remember what i called them i couldn t remember where i stored them i had no memory of what happened to them i even fired up timemachine and dug around my past still no luck why on earth do i do this to myself ? couldn t i have written myself a note somewhere in all my very organized book notes ? so i thought about it if i were a bonehead with adhd , what unrelated place would i stick graphics of pok mon trades ? then it hit me ! iphoto ! and there they were , right where they didn t belong i have often said that it is a good thing my brain is trapped inside my skull , or else i might misplace it the reason these graphics are so important is because they were screen caps of trades i completed on the pok mon global link since nintendo revamped that site to work with pok mon sun moon , i can t access those old trades anymore my plan was to tease gamers about the trading system i devised by posting the screen caps now that i have the screen caps again , tonight s goal will be to create the landing page for my book then i can let people know about it and quickly get busy working on my next book which i already started on friday because i was so excited about it yes , one can be excited writing about depression i know that sounds funny , but then again , if i didn t enjoy writing about the subject , i never would have blogged about it here for almost twelve years i also need to write tomorrow s blog post , which i think will be about confusing adhd symptoms with cold symptoms but for now , i m off to gently walk the treadmill at vasa if you d like a pain free reading experience learning how to help suicidal loved ones , read my book