good morning ! it s a cool f out there in midvale , utah , and i m going back to bed but first , a tale of whoa woe that will hopefully make you smile i had a phone interview scheduled , and i was so worried i would oversleep that i didn t sleep at all , which means that today will be a rough day for me i usually poke fun of my adhd here , as well as discuss my depression , but what really disrupts my life is my tic disorder i don t often write about it because it s a matter that is out of my control i can t do anything to make it better consequently , i have no clever tips to share with other people with tic disorders , so i don t write about it much except in passing unfortunately , there is one simple , insignificant thing that i can do to help my tic disorder sleep ! what a shame my adhd and insomnia aren t interested in helping me get some sleep deprivation means that i ll likely tic a lot today unless i plan a nap in there somewhere but that isn t my tale of woe ! you see , i got ready for the phone interview a day early because i thought tomorrow was today i was up doing email at three in the morning the other night like most normal people , blurry eyed , and moments before i staggered off to bed i had already delayed the interview a week because i had been ticking so much lately , then missed our last interview because my daughter had a seizure so when i read the email with the suggested new time , i fired off a yes ! , except without the capital letters and exclamation i maintain the fiction of professionalism at all times the worst part is that when they gave me a choice between today , which i thought meant wednesday , or tomorrow , which i thought meant thursday , i didn t realize they meant tomorrow tomorrow , which is friday insomnia stirred with differing time zones makes for blunders like this when adhd is the spoon now i ve agreed to do the interview while i m sitting with my daughter and a few thousand fans waiting in line to see jenna coleman at salt lake comic con i m sure the interview will work out just fine , assuming they can hear me actually , that s not the worst part i woke up early today to be ready for the phone appointment , so i only had four hours of sleep i was supposed to have a full night s sleep because i m attending that convention today my theory was that if i had a full night s sleep and no stress before the con , i could avoid cutting things short because i started ticking now i m going into the con with less sleep than usual and even more stress excelsior ! you know what ? i ve totally got this under control i ll just consider my preparation for the interview this morning as practice for tomorrow and when the real tomorrow happens , i ll just have to find a quiet spot somewhere surrounded by tens of thousands of people at a comicbook convention here s a case where feeling alone in a crowd might not be quite good enough to make for a quality conversation , but you don t think i m going to cancel the appointment and reschedule , do you ? who knows how much worse i ll make things ? ! whoa , i really did misspell woe that lets you know where my brain is at today i'm so excited to see what else the day has for me ! you might also like the monthly mind suicide no one cares ? it depends on who you listen to writing in a fishbowl day one writing in a fishbowl week three linkwithin