do you have a lot of bookmarks on your browser ? what about open tabs ? i just love them i like to keep dozens of them up at any give moment , to go along with my hundreds upon hundreds of bookmarks don t want to forget anything , right just now i discovered that my daughter had been on my computer again and had closed yet another window filled with dozens of tabs there was the usual moment of panic , followed by a loud , wailing sound very much like the sound luke skywalker made in that movie where he met a long lost relative all my research ! gone ! doesn t she realize i use open tabs like a todo list on my browser ? ! then it hit me i was finally free i try to keep my problem under control , but tabs and bookmarks are just so easy to make ! there i am , watching a show about detectives in shetland , when suddenly i m looking up shetland on flickr , researching the lds community in that area , reading a shetland article from about a twenty three year old girl going on an lds mission , then looking for a more recent follow up article and finding her facebook page through google instead , then researching the lds temple in switzerland each branch of research needed a new tab in my browser , and , of course , none of it had anything to do with what i was supposed to be working on at the moment isn t this how attention deficit disorder works ? i have many , many research sessions in my past , all tabs neatly archived as bookmarks to be gone through later later never comes , but i faithfully archive things over and over again just to free my browser from the burden of hundreds of tabs i decided recently my years of bookmarks needed a severe pruning because i couldn t find anything in them , but quailed at the thought of all the time i would waste organizing them i even had dead geocities pages bookmarked ! the adhd mind has a strong aversion to boredom , and i ca n't think of anything more boring than pruning web browser bookmarks ! the quickest solution would be to close all my windows , eliminating all my tabs , then quit the browser find the bookmarks file on my computer delete it but no , i wanted to preserve my bookmarks just in case i ever needed them i know i know that ll never happen , but here s a way to reset your bookmark tabs nightmare while archiving the past it took me about minutes of dedicated work keeping one thing in mind , if you don t use it , lose it ! the following directions are for safari , but most browsers share similar features close all browser windows except one , waving good bye to all those tabs if you must , archive them as bookmarks , but get them gone we re trying to tame chaos here now let s archive your bookmarks for a rainy day select safari file export bookmarks and tuck your bookmark archive away in a safe folder next , select safari bookmarks edit bookmarks from my picture , you can see that my bookmarks go on and on and on they re even fractally eternal within each folder it s frightening because if you compare the following photo to the previous picture , you 'll see i 've already been pruning the trick to this process is to delete as much as you can while keeping in mind another favorite saying of mine , when in doubt , throw it out there is no other trick the goal is to simplify your browser environment to reduce clutter distractions set a timer keep yourself motivated if you can t be bothered to click on the bookmark to see what it is , delete it delete whatever is leftover when the timer goes off remember ! you archived these already you aren t losing anything enjoy your cleaner , simplified bookmark list i bet i can prune this even more ! enjoy your cleaner , less chaotic browser only the most recent items are kept in my favorites only two tabs are open ahhh , absolute peace and tranquility until the next mad research binge if you liked this article on organization , you should read my book all of its pages are numbered in a row