this is a post i wrote a couple months ago i noticed that i never published it so here it is now one big fear i have these days that keeps me from going out and doing things is the people will ask me what i'm doing now when i do have conversations with inquiring adults , they tend to go something like this well meaning grownup how are you doing ? me i'm okay , thanks me in my head things do n't suck as much as they used to or maybe they suck more i'm not sure well , they suck in a different way that is n't as intensely sucky does that work ? grownup only okay ? ! me haha yeah not too bad , but things could be better me in my head i mean , i guess my hands do n't shake as much from the medication any more and i do n't have to take two naps a day any more and since i decreased the zoloft , i have been able to go out shopping sometimes a few weeks ago i could n't leave the house so i dropped out of the community college classes i was taking to justify not being officially enrolled in college but i guess i do n't feel as miserable as i did now that i do n't have the added stress of classes does that count ? do i have to feel great ? oh yeah i guess that is , like , the th commandment of evangelical christianity grownup are you still at school ? me no i'm , um , actually taking a break from school right now me in my head i dropped out er , well , not really withdrew i did finished three years does n't that count for anyone ? ? i do n't really want to go back but not finishing college is one of the seven deadly sins of suburbia so i guess i should try to assure you that i will return and this is just a little break grownup oh for how long ? a semester ? a year ? me uh , i'm actually not sure yet i'm still looking into my options and waiting to see how things go me in my head it was a semester but now it 's looking more like it will be a year judging by the tailspin i took three weeks ago i wish i could finish the damn degree after all my work , but i just get so overwhelmed , especially by the stupid group work they always feel the need to assign and what should i even study ? ? anything i choose , i have to start from scratch to finish the requirements even my old major needs a lot of work in stupid classes i'm not interested in to complete oh , sorry i'm rambling grownup oh well , do you have a job ? me no , no i'm just hanging out for the time being me in my head i really wish i had something to justify my existence to the world i applied to ten jobs even though i really was n't fit to work yet but nothing worked out not too long ago i was sleeping about twelve or so hours a day because i was having a bad reaction to a medication , so that probably would n't have worked too well sorry i'm not productive enough for your tastes i wish i was doing something useful i guess this all looks pretty confusing from the outside and you 're probably judging me right now , but you do n't know what happened and , trust me , it was bad i do a lot of craft projects now though it 's nice to have time for art i was always so fixated on schoolwork before that i never gave myself the chance to do this kind of stuff too much before but no one seems very interested in that part of my life i have to either have a job or a degree in progress grownup oh well , i bet you 're probably praying plenty about what to do next i 'll keep you in my prayers ! me oh , thank you me in my head i wish i still felt like praying , but i do n't i ca n't i never thought i 'd find myself feeling this way i thought my bond with god was unbreakable , even when things got really dark but something snapped at the end of the school year all i can remember now when i think about god is how i sat on my bathroom floor one spring afternoon just before school ended and sobbed i mean , wept screamed i do n't remember what happened , but all of the weight of what had happened to me sunk in the disappointment of a year plagued by incommunicable pain the frustration of god letting it all crash and burn in spite of my desperate prayers and pleas i had been so faithful and dedicated to him , to his people , preaching his truth even in my darkest hours , trying to share my story with others to bring hope to anyone in a similar place , trying to show his love to friends even when i felt so abandoned and alone my faith finally gave out i felt betrayed i always judged people who walked away from god and i assumed their faith had never been true , but now i see that their hurt and disillusionment was real i do n't think that prayer can fix me if god really cares , he seems to have made it abundantly clear that he does n't want to fix me so maybe you can see why i dread running into any old acquaintances i do n't want to come out with my story to people who wo n't appreciate it or who will outright judge it , but if you do n't explain what happened to people , your situation is just odd and confusing for someone who already feels very self conscious in social situations , it 's rather unbearable the awkwardness of having no good explanation for not performing up to standard the irritating nature of people 's optimistic , even insensitive , comments why do i have to always be doing great ? ! the reminder that everything got really screwed up for you and now you 're a lump on the back of productive society no , thank you i do n't need anyone else to judge me i already judge myself