you know how i 've been talking about writing a book , or a zine , or an ebook , for a very long time now ? well , i keep starting , then deciding it 's crap and starting afresh , then deciding that one is crap too , then re writing part of it , then starting another one basically , i have n't been very productive when it comes to writing a book or even a zine so about a week ago , with november and thus nanowrimo coming up , i started thinking hey , why do n't i just basically do nanowrimo in that i'm aiming for , words by the end of november , , words a day , only write my book about unschooling instead of a novel ? because i 'll be writing lots this month , and wo n't really be able to write much on this blog , i figure this is a good opportunity to solicit some guest posts i 've been wanting to get for a while now ! here are the subjects i'm looking for rising out of high school making the decision , convincing parents , dealing with school staff , how friends react , making the transition deschooling , etc i think this is a super important subject , but one i'm not qualified to write about i fairly regularly get emails from teens in high school who really want to get out , but do n't really know how , and i just feel helpless because i have no clue what advice to give ! but i know that there are riseouts who read this blog , and i know that your story would be much appreciated by many people ! ! unschooling and marginalization unschooling and privilege i'm not really sure that 's a good title at all , but basically what i'm trying to do here is make some space for narratives about unschooling that you do n't usually see the most common unschooling narrative is that of a middle class , white , able bodied , nuclear family when you go to unschooling conferences , they 're mostly populated by middle class white people so what i'm looking for is people to write about why they think that is the intersection of unschooling and class , race , physical ability , sexuality , gender and the lived reality of unschooling when you 're not middle class , not white , not straight , etc unschooling internationally no , i'm not talking about travel i feel like there 's already lots of interesting stuff out there on that ! what i'm interested in is posts about unschooling in countries outside of north america what 's it like unschooling in mexico ? ireland ? romania ? india ? i'm looking for stories of people from the country they 're writing about please , not ex pats and i think that 's it for now ! if you 'd be interested in writing an article on any of those subjects , or a combination of any of the above subjects , please email me at unschooledwriter gmail com if at all possible , i 'd like to receive your finished posts during november though contact me before writing anything to discuss details , please ! , so that there can be interesting content here during this month , but if that 's not possible , i'm still interested in having your posts at a later date ! you might also like guest post unschooling everything guest post the future of unschooling by jeff landale favorite unschooling posts on this blog of guest post , anyone ? linkwithin