today was wonderful ! i woke up to my sister getting ready to head on over to our friend nick 's house , to help him decorate his christmas tree , so of course i decided that i wanted to join in the fun ! last night and today heralded the true arrival of winter for this area , as we got our first real snowstorm of the season ! ! we 've had about centimeters or about inches of snow fall in the last day and it 's still falling as i write this ! , and as we headed out the door this early afternoon , it was simply gorgeous ! lovely snow swirling everywhere we walked happily , singing christmas songs , and being very happy that we could enjoy so much snow without putting up with so much cold the coldest it 's gotten today was c for most of the day it was even warmer ! once at nick 's house , we set to work decorating the tree if something that 's so much fun can even be called work i am a total sucker for reflective ornaments i ca n't resist taking a ton of pictures of them ! look ! all three of us are in this one ! we had a brief hot chocolate break , and then continued with the tree decorating while struggling with the two very inquisitive dogs who are very good at getting in the way , and seem strangely attracted to the most breakable ornaments we even decorated the rest of nick 's house with ribbons ! then , once we were done with all of our that , we surveyed our finished work the three proud decorators , me , nick , and emi after a fairly large considering it was nearing supper time snack , we settled down to watch a favourite christmas movie from emi and my childhood , the muppet christmas carol we could n't finish it before supper , so emi and i headed back through the snowy wonderland well , the mostly wonderland we did have to move into a driveway to avoid a snowplow at one point , who , though we were in plain sight and had not just popped up in front of him , showed no signs of either veering to avoid us or slowing down a very common occurrence with snowplows around here for a very quick supper of homemade lentil soup i uploaded my photos from the afternoon , then we headed back over to nick 's house , where we were joined by trev as well for the remainder of the movie when we finished the movie it was still snowing , and looked simply lovely from the window , so there were no complaints from anyone when nick decided he wanted to go play outside in the snow we had a snowball fight , ran around in the middle of the streets one of my favourite things about snowstorms is how few cars are on the roads , and decided to venture into the woods and that was beautiful so beautiful ! even though darkness had fallen a while ago , it was still very easy to make our way through the trees , since the reflection of light from the crisp white snow made it almost as bright as dusk sound is even more muffled after a snowfall in the woods than it is on the streets , and it felt almost holy i was sad when we had to head back towards a warm house when emi 's feet started to get too cold after getting warmed up with some hot chocolate and cookies , i was still quite happy to head outside yet again for the walk home , despite a bit of wet clothing i just adore the first real snowfall of the season ! all in all , it was a day very well spent peace , idzie