so , you know how i said i was kind of busy working on a couple of projects ? well , the main thing i'm doing right now is starting an unschooling support group in the montreal area ! you may remember when my mom and i attempted to do so in february well , that time , someone else was doing the same thing , so we were involved with that briefly , but then it fell through and was temporarily forgotten also different about this time is that back in february , my mom and i were starting the group , which really meant i badgered her to do this or that important detail , and she went about things in a way i considered incredibly slow and meandering ! this time , however , i simply decided that i really thought that this group was important , that it meant a lot to me that other families have that support , and that therefor i should be the one to make it happen and so i am ! i already have a few families interested , i'm looking at were we can meet , and genuinely doing this thing ! it feels good to be actually doing what i want to for once , instead of just hoping it 'll magically happen , then being disappointed when it does n't ! this is the message i posted to a ton of online groups hello ! unschooling , worldschooling , child led learning , delight driven learning , life learning many names , yet one desire to live in freedom , loving , learning , and living each day to the fullest ! that is the joy of unschooling i'm an year old longtime unschooler , and it was always hard for my family when my sister and i were younger , since pretty much everyone we knew was very school at home , and thought we were crazy to be unschooling ! so i want to create something that was n't there for my family when i was young , but would have made things so much easier for us ! what i want to do is bring together a supportive , caring group of unschooling families , families who are seriously considering unschooling , and those passionate about unschooling , who can validate each others choices , share experiences , and just enjoy each others company ! if this sounds as great to you as it does to me or even if it just interests you please check out this yahoo ! group for a bit more information on the support group , and if you 're interested in being part of this , please join ! http groups yahoo com group unschoolingmontreal still have questions ? feel free to contact me at unschoolingmontreal gmail com i hope to see you at our first meeting ! i greatly appreciate support from people all over the place , and would love to hear your ideas , suggestions , etc for the group , but i 'd like to keep the yahoo group as simply an extension of a physical group that actually meets in real life , so please only join the yahoo group if you 're in the montreal area ! i'm so excited about this ! ! dances around excitedly peace , idzie you might also like starting an unschooling group in our area ! unschooling group and gifts unschooling publicity in montreal blame unschooling ! linkwithin