you remember emi , right ? i 've even shared some of her writing on here ! and i 've long lamented the fact she does n't keep her own blog well , now she does ! ! it 's called drumroll the creations of a scribbling face and this is what the description on that blog says hello and welcome to my writing blog , or , as it 's officially known , the creations of a scribbling face ! i am said scribbling face , and i 'll be using this blog as place to post some of my poetry and prose , as well as my ideas , inspirations , epiphanies , dilemmas , and general musings on creative writing i love receiving feedback , whether it be encouraging praise or bluntly honest critique , so if you have something to say please go ahead and say it ! i really appreciate every comment do n't worry , i appreciate every silent visitor too and now , on to the scribbles ! i highly recommend you check it out ! ! it 's just started , so there is n't much to read yet , but just follow along , and i'm sure it 'll soon be a wonderful place to hang out in other exciting news to me , anyway , since i'm such a blogging nerd blogger has finally added the option to add pages to a blog ! ! woo hoo ! i 've been waiting for this for a very long time you 'll now notice that at the top of my blog , there are multiple pages more will be added soon , as well , and in the coming days , all the varied and very messy , hard to find , info located on the sidebar of this blog will be slowing disappearing , and moving into the far more organized and pretty pages at the top of this blog ! the links and resources page is proving to be quite a project , and i 'd love some help with it please feel free to share your favorite websites , posts , and articles on unschooling with me , so i can add them to the page i'm hoping to put together quite a collection of helpfull stuff ! peace , idzie you might also like pasta and emi 's new blog introducing emi growing up unschooled with siblings insecurities and an anniversary three years blogging linkwithin