this is cross posted from the zine website , diy life zine i'm now looking for submissions for submissions of articles , opinions , artwork , poetry , quotes , and anything else you want to send me for the summer issue of diy life i originally chose this theme because i feel it gives a ton of freedom in what you submit anything from physical diy projects , to articles on radical political philosophy , to education , parenting , crafting , and beyond ! while still retaining a more radical feel and outlook as a side note , your submission can also be anti or against something you see as being opposed to a diy lifestyle i e corporations i'm looking for submissions from everyone who 's interested in creating writing , drawing , etc something that would fit the general theme , no matter your age , political leanings , or anything else this is added because of several questions i 've received asking about this ! the theme is pretty flexible , but i do reserve the right to not accept submissions that really do not fit with the theme i e why public schooling is absolutely necessary , though i don t really expect to turn down many things , if anything ! word count can be as much as words if more than that , it will be split up into multiple parts , to be published in consecutive issues of diy life to see what the winter issue looked like , go here , and to get some ideas for what to write about , go here ! this is a biannual zine , that publishes a winter and a summer issue the current deadline for the summer issue is june st if you 're interested in writing something , but want opinions on what to write about , or have any questions , please contact me at open eyed slave gmail com i'm really excited about this issue , and i'm going to actually work on making it a real zine this time , with more artwork and stuff , since the last issue was sorely lacking ! because of this , i'm putting an emphasis on looking for sketches , artwork , cool crimethinc style political stuff art , and anything else you think would be good in a zine , as well as cover art when you send something in , please include a short bio maximum characters , not words , that includes your personal website , email address , blog , twitter or deviantart account , or any other web address , if you want it to be included have any questions ? contact me , idzie , at open eyed slave gmail com thank you to everyone for your interest and support , and i'm really looking forward to what you have to share ! d peace , idzie you might also like diy life zine looking for submissions for issue ! first ever issue of diy life zine now available ! ! diy life zine now has it 's own website ! making a zine , and looking for submissions ! ! linkwithin