today was , and continues to be , marvelous i stayed up until a bit past am last night morning , so did n't wake up until about when i got up at , my parents were heading out the door to go downtown and pick up a large order of handmade soaps and similar items , which have been popular gift items for the last few years with our family i decided to come along , so brushed my teeth and got dressed at super speed , grabbed a car mug of tea , then off we went ! it was beautiful weather today bright , crisp , and cold we had a bit of trouble finding the place , since in the past we 've bought either from a table at a bazaar or through the internet , but we finally found the mooka storefront after a bit of time spent getting lost and a little extra searching ! it was wonderful in there simple , and virtually undecorated it 's only recently the owner got her own space the walls were lined with all of the wonderful shea butter soaps , bath bombs , body butters , lip balms , and perfume oils when i spotted the perfume oils , i oohed and promptly proceded to smell them all i should explain at this point that both my mother and sister are allergic to all synthetic scents , as well as some natural ones , so i 've never worn perfume it 's only in the last few years that i 've started to use even naturally scented things soap , shampoo , handcream mooka has mostly naturally scented stuff , so my mom can use a few of the soaps , and the ones that are too scented for her to use , we give as gifts so anyway , after finding a favorite perfume oil of cotton blossom aloe , my mom very sweetly no pun intended offered to buy me a sample and see if she could tolerate it she can ! i 've been wearing it since i got home , and although she had me wash it off at first , the slightly fainter smell that 's left behind it does n't wash off well does n't bother her at all , which is great ! emi says it smells weird she 's even pickier about scents than my mom , but it does n't give her a headache so all good ! the lady who runs the company is quite nice , and we love the amazing customer service as well as the products ! after we left there , with some free samples of the mango body butter in my purse , which i also love , we stopped at the bulk food store i love the smell of that place ! it smells of spices and coffee and tea and other yummy stuff , and we left with lots of gourmet hot chocolate mix , teas , and chocolate yummy there was also much joking around the elderly lady behind us in line seemed to find the three of us quite precious ! when we got home , my mother and i went through the now yearly ritual of taking out all the lip balms and soaps , smelling them , and starting to decide which ones go to which relatives i want the avocado aloe and the patchouli hemp ones , and i'm going to try hard to convince my mom she wo n't be allergic to them ! on the way home i volunteered to cook supper , so i did i used a bottle of sun dried tomato sauce as a base , then added a ton of onions , black and green olives , and capers , and served that over fettuchini it was good , and there were no complaints ! during supper i made a deal with my mom that if she washes my dishes each day , i 'll cook supper each night it seems like a rather daunting task to me , but i hate washing dishes , and we can always trade back things did get tense at a few points once we got home , but i managed to cheer everyone up with my infectiously exuberant happiness p i discovered that i can do a happiness transfer with both my mother and sister , although it 's not really a transfer since i actually gain happiness from cheering them up ! i feel in a really christmasey mood i smiled at people in the street , and now i 've been bouncing around ever since i got home emi thinks i got high from the perfume , but i disagree my family always finds it funny that many people who do n't know me well think that i'm quiet and serious , since nothing could be further from the truth ! i get in completely crazy hyper moods and seriously act like i 've been abusing illegal substances , and i'm just a generally bouncy and random person thing is , i'm only like that around people i know well , so most people are still in the dark about the real me p oh ! and i 've always wondered what a mo is you always see clothing that 's made out of mohair , but i 've never seen a mo before ! ! finally , my mom looked it up and apparently a mo is also called an angora goat it is so freaking cute ! ! i'm going to get a pet mo someday and call him mo then i can honestly say the cool things i make out of his hair are made out of mo 's hair ! ! that would be totally awesome so anyway , i think i 'll head off to continue bouncing around pointlessly and falling over laughing when i do stupid yet amazingly fun things now nick just came over , so i should probably socialize as well may you all be full of holiday cheer , or just plain cheer if you 're not currently celebrating any holidays ! p peace , and with much hyper happy silliness , idzie