i love writing on this blog , but sometimes , i just do n't have much to say and there are so , so many wonderful people out there with terrific stories , opinions , and ideas to share so why not have my very first guest post ? i find that idea pretty exciting ! so are you interested ? here are a few things you should know what to write about ? something that you think will be relevant and interesting to the readers of this blog , and very importantly , something that 's relevant and interesting to you ! anyone , regardless of age , political opinions , educational choices , etc is free to submit something , i just ask that you keep the subjects things that will fit with this blog unschooling , sustainable living , spirituality , lots of different things , just as long as it 's not something that would seem out of place on this blog ! email me with questions open eyed slave gmail com this is open to you whether or not you have your own blog if i get more than one entry , i 'll choose the one i think would work best for this blog i also reserve the right to turn down any posts that i just do n't think would work well i may do basic editing on the chosen post , but if i change anything more major than fixing spelling mistakes or adding a comma or two , i 'll send it to you first for approval before posting it must be a post that has not previously been published anywhere online send all inquiries and posts to open eyed slave gmail com ! edit keep in mind that if there are multiple people interested in writing guest posts , any post idea for a post that does n't end up as the guest post , can be included in the next issue of the diy life zine instead i'm looking for lots of stuff for that ! ! or , it can be saved as a future guest post , if you 'd prefer wow , that seems like a lot of guidelines for a simple guest post , but i'm just trying to answer as many questions as i can before they come up ! this most likely wo n't be a regular thing , because i feel that if it was , it would be cutting into the submissions i get for the diy life zine , and i do n't want to do that but i definitely like the idea of having the occasional guest post , as long as it works out this time so , what do you have to say ? peace , idzie you might also like guest post unschooling everything guest post answering negative questions does n't need to be a priority guest post eat be free guest post the future of unschooling by jeff landale linkwithin