i received this book from the author and illustrator free of charge , but i am not receiving any other type of compensation for writing this review it 's always exciting getting books in the mail i always eagerly rip through the packaging , quickly finding a comfy or less than comfy if i'm in a particular rush place to settle down to rifle through the pages if it 's a longer book , and simply read straight through if it 's a shorter one a rule is to break a child 's guide to anarchy by john seven and jana christy seven , being a picture book , i read reasonably quickly , though i did take a bit of time on each page to fully admire the wonderfully charming artwork i 've long admired jana 's art , how gorgeous and organic it feels , the colours and textures and style it 's just lovely ! and this book was no different well , not when it comes to the good artwork , anyway in other ways , it is very different from any other children 's book i 've read ! many i think it 's fair to say most children 's picture books are thinly disguised morality tales , and when not outright morality tales , are still strongly pushing and presenting the norms and expectations of the dominant culture not particularly surprising , really , considering that the writers of most children 's books , like most people , are very firmly enmeshed in the dominant culture and really , does n't everyone know that children should listen to their parents and teachers , follow all the rules , behave well , etc ? john and jana , unschooling parents themselves , present a very different view in a rule is to break , saying on their site children are natural masters of anarchy , but are too often unaware of the power they wield in their cute little hands , and too seldom encouraged by grown ups to figure that out ! in a rule is to break a child s guide to anarchy that determined little devil girl wild child wages her own one girl rebellion against the stifling world of adults who just want her to behave ! and she brings her friends along ! with advice from ignore school and read books ! use your brain and forget about grocery stores and get dirty in your garden ! to sillier but no less engaging pages urging you to hug the ugliest monster you can find ! this book is definitely not your run of the mill children 's book and i love that ! because what this book really feels like is that it 's simply celebrating childhood the joy , the wonder of discovery , the spontaneity and strong emotions one page reads go ahead and get stompy ! with an obviously angry frustrated wild child expressing her emotions in the form of stomping i also appreciate that though identified as a girl by the authors , there 's nothing in either the wild child 's dress or behaviour that conforms to any gender expectations she 's just a kid who likes doing things her own way ! so there you have it if you had n't already gotten that impression , i definitely recommend this book i 've been bringing it with me on the various trips i 've been on in the late summer early fall , to show to anyone i think might be interested , and have been getting lots of positive responses to it ! so if you want to buy it , you can find out how to do so here , or you can download it for free here ! i hope that you , and any children in your life , appreciate this book as much as i did