guess what ? i m putting together a zine ! ! zines are just so cool , i decided that i d love to put one together myself , with the help of all of you , of course ! the theme of the zine is diy life doing things independently of experts , professionals , institutions , corporations , or similar things i m looking for submissions of articles , opinions , artwork , poetry , quotes , and anything else you want to send me i finally decided on this theme because i feel it gives a ton of freedom in what you submit anything from physical diy projects , to articles on radical political philosophy , to education , parenting , crafting , and beyond ! while still retaining a more radical feeling and outlook , which makes me , personally , happy ! as a note , your submission can also be anti or against something you see as being opposed to a diy lifestyle i e schools the theme is pretty flexible , but i do reserve the right to not accept submissions that really do not fit with the theme i e why public schooling is absolutely necessary , though i don t really expect to turn down anything , and am really looking forward to seeing what you guys have to share ! ! once i ve received enough submissions , and with enough prior warning to everyone who s interested in submitting , of course , i will then put everything together in a proper zine , which i will then send by email most likely in pdf format to anyone who wants it if someone can point me towards a good , safe , file hosting website , then i may also have it there for easy downloading , or if someone wants a hard copy , you can send me a few dollars to cover printing and shipping and i can send it straight to you sorry guys , but i m broke , so that s the only way i can do it ! i will also distribute some hard copies locally , and i d love it if you guys also chose to do so , but really , share it as much or as little as you want to , and in whatever ways you want to ! if you have something already written that you d like to submit , send it straight to me if you simply know that you want to submit something , but don t have it done yet and or haven t decided what you re going to do , please send me an email letting me know that , so that i know you will be submitting something at some point ! oh , and i will happily help with editing if you want me to , just ask otherwise , i will fix spelling mistakes and obvious grammatical mistakes the same word repeated twice , for instance , but will touch nothing else without your permission send all submissions to open eyed slave gmail com important if you want people to be able to find more of your work if they re interested , let me know when you send in your submission if you have a website , blog , twitter account , or any site that you want to be included in the zine example urban foraging by cindy jones www foragingwithcindy com suggestions , just that i can think of off the top of my head , and please know that you re entirely not limited just to the items in this list articles on education unschooling , homeschooling , skill sharing , community classes , educational co ops parenting attachment natural parenting , radical unschooling , non conditional parenting personal health care herbal medicine , wild medicinals , nutrition , first aid sustainable living gardening , food preservation , foraging , non toxic and homemade household products , re purposing projects , cooking and recipes community building living good for community people stuff community organizing , collectives , cooperatives , non violent communication , peer counseling , autonomous living , intentional communities , any by the people for the people type stuff independent travel diy projects or crafting projects of any sort building a kiln , soap making , jewelry making , bow and arrow making , whatever you enjoy doing ! art such as any artwork , in b w photos aren t great though , since they don t photocopy well any poetry any copyleft not copyrighted , or licensed under creative commons , artwork other than your own that you think would fit with the zine note because of its nature , your own artwork and poetry does not need to conform to the theme , though it certainly can miscellaneous stuff such as quotes , verses , or similar things , yours or copyleft stuff anything else you can think of ! ! ! ! ! note by submitting anything , you agree that it is copyleft not copyrighted , and can be copied and distributed by anyone that s just the way zines work people often appropriate content in them for other uses usually with proper attribution , although there are no guarantees for this to work , of course , i need submissions sent to open eyed slave gmail com ! ! ! i m really hoping i ll get enough , really looking forward to seeing everything i do get , and just generally really excited about this project d also , if you have any questions or suggestions , please drop me a line as well ! same address as above open eyed slave gmail com oh , and please feel free to pass this on to anyone whom you think may be interested ! peace , idzie