you know how in pop culture magazines i only ever read those when my grandma finishes hers and passes them on to me honest ! they have an in and out feature thingy for each new season and possibly each new year i have n't really payed attention to that ? well , i thought it would be fun to have my own ins and outs , things i 've personally changed or gotten rid of in my lifestyle , the types of clothes i'm currently wearing , as we head into the year so here goes ! fashion and style clothes still in mini skirts worn over jeans scarves ! anything plaid hats of all styles well , not all styles , but a lot p vintage fabrics clothing that look vintage , not just secondhand that looks new floufy hippie style shirts arm warmers hand thingies leg warmers emo holes in hoodies purple ! ! out camouflage patterns anything remotely preppy or gangsta other still in all natural hair products shea butter soap perfume oil shea butter lip balm organic , all natural hand cream hair dye ! especially purple out make up lipsil regular hand cream anything with parabens toxic chemical used as a preservative in tons of health and beauty products entertainment books , music , movies books still in anything by derrick jensen books on unschooling the teenage liberation handbook by grace llewellyn nation by terry pratchett hero by perry moore peeps by scott westerfeld the coyote road out books never go out of style ! music still in led zeppelin ayreon ! rise against more political music , including punk and folk progressive metal folk metal folk out pop hip hop rap movies still in everything is illuminated driving lessons juno dresses the dark knight sort of i mean , it was n't as amazing as everyone thouhgt imo , but the joker was frickin' cool ! out dumb action movies that they love to play at cadet events yay ! lifestyle still in vegetarianism ! veganism buying mostly secondhand clothes walking in the woods spending lots of time with my family walking around in the dead of night out trying to fit in conformity political opinions worldview still in anarchism anti beyond civilizationism animal rights environmentalism human rights out government politics corporations and their products faith in all of the above hobbies still in photography ! writing poetry blogging ! talking a ton about the things i believe in out cadets ! i think that 's about all i can think of for now i look forward to the new year , and to all it has to offer i plan on exercising more i'm a terrible couch potato , and finding some new activities to fill the void left by cadets i hope to see greater social change , and more realization that government is not and never will be the solution i hope to see tons of dialogue between diverse people , all trying to come up with solutions for issues of climate change , corporate control , and human and non human rights a lot to wish for , but hey , that 's what a new year is for ! wishing everyone the best in the coming year and beyond , peace , idzie