yesterday was lots of fun ! i was a bit worried , because ty and i were going to see the bands rise against and rancid at an outdoors venue , so although i really wanted to see rise against again they 're one of my favorite bands you may remember me talking about them when i saw them back in december it was also rainy , which is n't so much fun when you 're standing outside since it was downtown , and my mom also had to pick my sister up and drive her downtown a bit later emi 's drum teacher , who 's a really cool guy , offered to have her sell her handmade stuff between sets at the place where his band plays , she dropped ty and i off at a metro also know in other places as the train subway station , and we headed downtown ! it was rather funny , by the time we got to the last leg of our commute , it was so obvious that the great majority of people on the train with us were also heading to the same punk concert we were ! when we got there , the opening band , the riverboat gamblers , were about halfway through their set , so we watched them for a while they were pretty good ! however , it was raining pretty hard at the start , so even though i had a raincoat on , i still got pretty wet wet , but not cold , so i was still quite cheerful next came rancid they 're good ! i 'd only ever heard a few of their songs , so i did n't enjoy them as much as i could have , but i really want to hear more of their music now by the time rancid finished , it was getting pretty dark , it had stopped raining for the most part yay ! , and you could feel the crowd energy rising the crowd was definitely made up mostly of rise against fans ! we stood around waiting , feeling the occasional cool rain drops on our face , breathing in the tons of secondhand marijuana smoke there were seriously tons of people smoking weed ! i was amazed at the joint to cigarette ratio , since there really were n't many people smoking cigarettes at all we were even offered some for free , though we turned it down of course seriously , we did turn it down unknown dealer bad idea ! , hearing the intermittent chants of rise against ! , and waiting with excitement we worked our way right up into the front of the crowd , where we 'd have a good view when they finally came on , the crowd went wild ! i was very happy to have the earplugs that we 'd brought always a good idea to have at concerts ! we had a great time , jumping up and down , singing along loudly , and getting bumped into nearly constantly by people i 've never really been in the pit at a concert before , and it can get pretty rough you have to be aware of the people around you , keep your arms up to easily protect your head and upper torso , and not mind being squashed against multiple people ! except for one jerk who literally smashed into people with no care for injury , everyone was really cool though the worst injuries i got were frequently squished toes and a fairly light elbow to the throat and in the latter case , i instantly had a complete strangers hand on my shoulder and a concerned query if i was alright as i said , most people were really cool it also helped that there was very little real moshing , and when there was we were careful to stay out of it ! at the closest , there was only one person between us and the barrier in front of the stage it was really cool to have the lead singer actually that close , and singing straight to those of us right in front ! d we ended up moving to a safer location later on in the show , when the aforementioned jerk moved into our area , but it was still a good spot after the concert ended , we stumbled into the packed metro caked in dirt the rain had made the ground very mushy , to say the least , sweat ours and others , and beer one time when someone threw their cup over the crown , i actually got beer in my eye ouch eww bruised , sore , tired , and smelling strongly of weed we went to a station still in town where we were picked up by my mom and brought to the place where emi 's drum teacher , nick 's not the nick i 've talked about previously , a different nick p , band was playing their set only started at they are a really fricken' good jazz band ! i loved their music apparently the previous two bands that had played before were good as well , so although emi had n't sold anything , she 'd enjoyed the music my one problem with the evening a university student ended up hanging out with emi for a while , and he was totally hitting on her my little sister getting hit on by a guy in his early twenties ! ! ! he thought she was older than she was , and she made no move to tell him otherwise instead , she gloated at me , since i 'd informed her she would never pass for , and she did grumbles but big sister over protectiveness aside , it was a great evening p frequently , ty and i would wander out and wander around the street ty got something to eat , a slightly drunken guy played us a song on a ukulele , and , considering , he was pretty good ! when ty handed him a couple of dollars , the ukulele player happily informed us that it was enough for another beer oh dear p by the time we headed home , it was about we said goodbye , told the band how much we 'd enjoyed them , made plans for emi to attempt to sell her stuff at the bands next gig , and headed to the car we then proceeded to get lost almost instantly since we got lost near one of montreal 's well renowned bagel stores one that 's open , we picked up a dozen deliciously fresh bagels it 's okay that we 're lost we giggled in cheerful tiredness it 's an adventure with bagels ! ! said emi happily every adventure is better with bagels , i agreed with my mouth full we also saw a depaneur corner store advertising that they were open hours a day hmm , someone seems to be unclear on the concept i also broke my personal record for how late i 'd stayed downtown ! when we finally got home at about , i took a quick shower to get rid of the concert grime , then collapsed in bed i slept until past this afternoon , and i still feel tired ! but it was a very good time had by all last night peace , idzie you might also like rise against trips and ukuleles and anarchists , oh my ! back home from a wonderful trip to boston ! growing up unschooled with siblings linkwithin