so , my biggest gift this year was a digital slr camera it was counted as a gift , since my parents are paying for close to half of it , so even though i'm paying for a huge chunk i had to wait until christmas to get it ! i was so excited to be finally getting a really good camera , and i took gazillions of pictures on christmas eve and day ! i think the best way to tell the story of the holidays is through those pictures just after supper on christmas eve , a supper spent with my my mom , dad , and sister at our house , i got to open my brand new canon eos digital rebel xs my dad was pretty excited about he camera too , and this is one of the first shots , taken by him we then hurried out the door to go to my aunt 's house and celebrate with my dad 's side of the family traditionally quebecois families go to midnight mass on christmas eve , then have supper afterwards , but we only eat at about nine or ten now usually , since none of the family goes to midnight mass the three siblings , my dad , and his two sisters , take turns having christmas at their houses , and this year the aunt who 's house it was only served dessert that 's why we ate at our house ahead of time at least it was good dessert ! emi hates this pic , but i really like it pretty tree i love how everyone is enthusiastically discussing something in this pic i love how my grandmaman looks in this photo ! although my cousin looks grumpy as usual the table , set up beautifully gifts ! my dad took this one i love this shot so much ! i took a bunch of nice pic 's of my dad , but this one is probably my favorite tree and gifts ! i did n't take any photo 's of people opening gifts on christmas eve , since i was too busy opening my own ! we left my aunt 's at about am , so by the time we drove home , settled down , and went to bed , it was past three ! because of that we were all up late on christmas morning my dad got up at nearly eleven , and this is the man who usually considers getting up at seven sleeping in ! but when we 'd all finally stumbled out of bed and eaten breakfast , it was time for my mom to open her special gift a guitar ! she was very happy with that thank you so much ! then we all opened our gifts ! i really do n't know why he 's holding that clippy thing , since it certainly was n't a present ! i am in love with this shot her expression , the detail , everything ! emi , however , not so much gifts ! i love taking pictures of ornaments naruto ! given to emi by me new locomotive book happiness self portrait , wearing my new fuzzy hat boo boo ! also known as winston playing with her new toy tree ! again the reflection in this made me really happy more ornaments taken with the zoom lense on my camera that thing can make something across the street look like i'm practically touching it this shot , which was n't at full zoom , is of the tree on our lawn , taken from my front doorway after gift gift opening , we watched my dad 's two new dvd 's one was jeff dunham 's christmas special , and the other was a show by john pinet both were hilarious ! then off we went to my grandmothers my mom 's mom i love her tree ! my grandma is not good at smiling for pictures , so i had to take a lot of them before i got a few good ones ! ewwwwwwww ! ! my tofurky i was extremely happy to finally be able to eat turkey with everyone else ! does n't it look tasty ? haha , i can see your nostrils ! wtf ? laughs we both had quite a bit of trouble reading my grandma 's handwriting but we were both quite happy wth our gifts ! sliced tofurky happy ! i always love reflections so , that' pretty much what my christmas looked like it always seems that everyone puts so much effort into it all , so much stress and time and enthusiasm , and then poof it 's gone time scares me sometimes i'm going to take a picture or two or three of my gifts , and maybe get those up tonight i hope your holidays are , and continue to be , wonderful ! peace , idzie