the poll just closed ! the results are below what subjects are you most interested in me writing about ? unshooling my daily life what i'm up to green anarchy anti civilizationism all of the above total votes also , i know that a couple of people asked me to keep them posted on how the zine was going , so i 'll give a litle update on that ! about people have said they will , or probably will , contribute to the zine , which is really exciting ! i 've actually received different things from different people , and am hoping to get more stuff soon so that 's going well in other random news , we , we being my mom , sis , and a friend , went to the anti colonial thanksgiving dinner a few nights ago , where we ate delicious vegan food made by a local collective , watched a very interesting , moving , and thought provoking documentary film called club native , listened to a couple of interesting speakers notably a woman from bc who had some very interesting things to say about the olympics , organizing against the olympics , and similar things , and just left with lots to think about and talk about ! from the moment we left , we were having fascinating conversations on indigenous rights , colonialism , sexism , minority groups , counter cultures i love the wonderful conversations mum , emi , and i have ! emi also commented how very much she likes being around the more radical type counter cultures , including both unschoolers and anarchists the type of people to attend an anti colonial dinner are not exactly state loving types i agree that it just tends to be so much more of an open and friendly environment ! oh , and as a funny side note , i commented that i was mildly surprised at how many people there were who were dressed normally , and emi looked at me as if i was crazy idzie , she said , you 've forgotten what normal is you think if someone does n't have huge holes in their pants and political buttons attached to their blue hair , they 're normal and they 're not well , excuse me p apparently most of the people at the dinner were dressed in that flaky hippie style , wearing clothes from thrift stores that were 'normal' years ago , then adding a knit hat according to em , that 's a style that many unschoolers also favour i love my sister p and while we 're talking about emi isms , she recently described anarchists as a whole as being hippies without all the flowers , which sounds pretty accurate to me , actually she says all of this with an air of slightly exasperated affection , which is not in the least insulting , and considers herself an anarchist though she 's not as loud about it as me , though she does not consider herself a hippie she really is n't at all , just in case you were wondering yeah i really love my sister and that little bit of rambling is all there is for now , folks peace , idzie you might also like first ever issue of diy life zine now available ! ! diy life zine looking for submissions for issue ! diy life zine now has it 's own website ! making a zine , and looking for submissions ! ! linkwithin