i do n't like the term homeschooling i really do n't and it 's always kind of bothered me that that 's the default term used here in north america what we , and many others , have done bears very little resemblance to schooling of any sort ! so i figured i 'd do a brief list of all the terms i 've heard of , both for home education in general and more specifically for unschooling , that in my opinion are way better than homeschooling home based education , home education , independent learning , home learning , self directed learning , life learning , organic learning , natural learning , autodidactism , worldschooling , child led learning , student led learning , delight driven learning and i'm sure i'm missing some probably many ! other terms now , i 've recently gotten into a few discussions about terminology , and about whether or not it was good or bad to have a unifying label for the self directed learning style that 's commonly known as unschooling and i do think that unschooling is a great unifying word for this philosophy of learning , and since it 's becoming better known , being the term most commonly used in articles and on tv shows , i think it 's become very useful , especially in recent times i also think it 's great to pick whatever term you feel is best for you i just think it 's nice to have a back up word that 's increasingly well known ! oh , and feel free to let me know what terms i missed i'm always happy to hear new ones ! peace , idzie p s can you tell i'm feeling better by the fact i'm actually posting ? i just hope i continue to feel better ! knocks on wood but , i am still sick , so if anything sounds off in this post , i'm blaming the cold i currently still have p p p s i know i 've been accused of nitpicking , and arguing about semantics when i talk about words i use , words i like and dislike , and all that but the fact remains , i find this subject both interesting and personally important , so i ca n't help but nitpick and complain about terms on occasion ! p p p s last one , i promise ! i added a share button at the bottom of each post opinions are welcome is it useful or annoying ? you might also like unschooling is not relaxed homeschooling why i use labels blame unschooling ! learning advice from a learning life linkwithin