on the th , the day after tomorrow , i leave for the northeast unschooling conference along with my mother and sister and i'm very excited for it ! ! i get to see so very many terrific people , i get to hear peter gray author of the psychology today blog freedom to learn speak , and meet erica goldson , the woman who did the wonderful and now famous anti school valedictorian speech it should be a blast ! my sister 's birthday even happens to fall while we 're there , so we 'll be celebrating that as well after we arrive back home on the st , we 're only here for a little while before we leave for the toronto unschooling conference on the th ! this is our first time going to this conference , and i'm looking forward to it ! i 'll also be speaking at that conference , doing a talk called unschooling is forever unschooling is the realization that life and learning are not two separate things yet even with this realization , sometimes end points start sneaking in but in a philosophy such as this , can unschooling life learning really end neatly , can you just unschool grade school or highschool , finish up with unschooling , then move on ? unschooling is to me , as i continue through what are usually considered the college years , not only the realization that life and learning are not separate , but also the realization that unschooling can be a lifelong process of growth and discovery learning is everywhere school , be it elementary , high school , or institutions of higher education , is optional ! i ll talk about my lifelong journey of unschooling , my feelings on learning and education , and about what happens next for an unschooler when those high school years have finished i 've done brief into then answer questions type talks several times now , and they no longer stress me at all really actually , i really enjoy them ! but since this is more of a real speech , i was totally freaking out about it for a while , and panicking that i had n't finished it yet or , if i'm to be honest , started writing it at all however , as of last night , i just stopped stressing and , surprise surprise , now that i'm more relaxed about it i 've moved beyond having just a list of points and am now actually writing it ! i just hope it goes well then , after being home for less than a week , i'm off again on the th for not back to school camp with my sister ! i'm so looking forward to this camp this year ! ! it 's my last year as a camper , as i 'll be graduating , and i'm going to get as much goodness out of this last time as i can it 's a great camp ! not back to school camp a glance within from allen ellis on vimeo for all three of these events , i plan to bring along my small point and shoot camera that also happens to record video of not great quality , but good enough for youtube ! because i was thinking , since so many unschoolers have such awesome things to say , but do n't talk much online , people are missing out on hearing their insights and thoughts so i figured it would be a really cool project to record short minute interviews on unschooling with as many people as are interested in being a part of this ! i'm not making any type of documentary or anything i 'd just post the interviews , individually , on my youtube channel and this blog so if you 're going to be at one of these events and are interested in being a part of this , come find me and let me know ! also , whether or not you want to be interviewed , if you 're going to be at one of these places , come say hi ! i love meeting new people , and since it 's been nearly a year since my last paralyzing bout of shyness at northeast last year , i kind of flipped out for the first couple of days and was just really really shy , i 'll probably even be really outgoing and talkative ! looking forward to seeing many old friends , and meeting many new ones