got up at eleven something , after going to bed fairly late last night i checked the computer as i usually do when i first get up answered emails , messages , comments , read some new blog posts and articles i follow over blogs , got up to date on the whole unschooling media freak out that 's been going on my mother and i shared a few different articles with each other , and talked about what 's been going on while i continued to do stuff on the computer , my mother went out to get some fresh bread from our favorite bakery , which i happily ate when she got home at four or so , emilie finally stumbled out of bed after pulling yet another all nighter , getting up just in time for our good friend nick to show up at the door ! we let him in for some reason , we usually do and in talking about gardening , growing your own veggies , and stuff like that , we finally did what we 've been talking about doing for days start some of our own seeds ! ! we planted kale , and sunflowers , and beans , and sage , and tomatoes , and lettuce emi and mom rushed out the door as soon as we were done planting , since they were running late to a musical and cabaret they were attending ! meanwhile , nick and i headed over to his house where we cleaned out all the dead stuff from his garden , and did a bit of weeding gardening like that is so relaxing getting your hands dirty , seeing the improvement from start to finish one of the things that we pulled up from the garden were dandelions , roots intact , so i decided to bring them home and eat them ! i love my father after hanging out with nick for a little while more before meandering home , i cheerfully tramp into the house with a handful of grubby dandelion plants , and he does n't even bat an eye i think he knows me by now i have n't experimented in cooking for way too long , even though i really love coming up with my own recipes , or severely modifying an existing recipe but my mother had left a bowl of batter for crepes , and inspired by the fresh dandelions , i pulled out a cookbook to see how dandelion greens are usually prepared what i ended up doing after cooking the crepes and setting them aside , was sauteing the dandelion greens , kale , and garlic in olive oil , adding water instead of more oil when needed , and adding slivered almonds and tamari soy sauce when the greens were partially cooked when done , this mixture was wrapped up in the crepes crepes are eaten with savory fillings quite often in quebec the recipe could use some tweaking , but not bad for my first try ! and dessert ? crepes with maple syrup ! as for the dandelion roots , i 've wanted to try those as a coffee substitute for a while now so i washed them , roasted them , then ground them up and put them in the coffee maker sadly , that was a bit of a fail flavour was n't bad , but i needed about three times the amount of root that i had next time , i will harvest more dandelions before trying that i wish i had pictures of my cooking adventures , but i'm afraid i did n't take any this time ! oh yeah , and i even cleaned up every single bit of mess i made while cooking and trust me , when cooking , i make big messes ! and that 's been my day so far ! emi and mom just arrived home , so i think i 'll go hang with them for a while peace , idzie