now , how to write about this ? i have a mild head cold , so my brain feels rather stuffed up and slow , yet i do n't really want to put off writing about nbtsc because i'm sure too much of it will slip past my mind if i wait too long ! i do n't want to write about it in a chronological way , as i have with the conferences i 've been too , so i 'll try something different to start with , as you 'll know from my earlier posts , i was n't looking forward to nbtsc all that much i felt like i may have been getting sick , and like camp , perhaps , was n't right for me at this time however , from the moment i got there , things were vastly better than i 'd thought they 'd be ! i knew a huge portion of the people there , so instead of being overwhelmed by all the people rushing around , i was cheerfully greeting old acquaintances and friends and happily talking to new folk as well ! it amazed me that i genuinely was n't feeling very shy i did n't feel like hiding in a corner , or only talking to people i knew well i was quite happy conversing with those both new and old ! so the week got off to a good start in that way and the getting sick bit i 'd worried about did n't happen also , we were put into our advisee groups that first evening advisee groups are groups of about campers and one staffer who meet daily to check in about how they 're feeling , play games , or just generally do whatever they want within that group , and the staffer for my group was actually the person i was hoping i 'd get after reading the staff bio 's on the nbtsc website ! ! he 's a green anarchist , and just a totally awesome guy all around so that was really cool also , i simply loved my advisee group as a whole ! the people were awesome , and it was just a really nice atmosphere the first night was fucking cold ! that was n't so cool i slept badly , was really sore in the morning , and although i was fine in the daytime , that second evening was the worst i felt in terms of mental well being the whole week i was n't really homesick , but i sure as hell was warmth sick ! ! however , my mom had dropped off extra blankets around supper time on the first full day she was staying at a local campground for a couple of nights so despite my worries that i 'd have another horrible night , i slept just fine from then on out , the week was just great ! i had some wonderful conversations about anti civilizationism green anarchy with multiple people , listened to a very interesting debate about anti civ stuff between other people , had conversations about freeganism , nontraditional paths i e not going to college and or getting a normal job , unschooling , politics , and a ton of other awesome things i love the fact that at camp , monsanto is a bad word , and that if i made some comment dissing corporations , mainstream media , government , or similar , it was practically guaranteed that at least one or two people who heard would instantly jump in with agreement ! that freedom to state my opinions openly felt really good now , that does n't mean that most peoples opinions were as overall extreme ? as mine , just that i found common ground with many people i have to thank julie for her utopia workshop , and mike for also being a green anarchist , because those two things made me brave enough to openly talk about my views , when usually i'm not willing to in big groups since i know everyone will disagree vehemently and i 'll end up feeling bad ! after that first time , being open about my views was much easier for the rest of the week i also just really felt that i made a lot of good connections with people some were small connections , with people i never really talked to , but we 'd always share a smile others i felt a really strong connection with , whether or not we talked much , or simply spent a lot of time with each other ! that felt really good and i really , really want to keep in touch with people i also think that anyone from camp who 's ever in the area should come visit me oh , and i also exercised a lot more than i usually do i was up and down the rocky hill to my cabin multiple times a day , and also went on a great but quite difficult hike up the side of a mountain the view from the top of the trail was incredible ! , canoed out to a rope swing and swam now that was tons of fun but damn , that water was cold ! , and just generally was n't nearly as much of a couch potato as usual p something i'm actually missing already about camp besides the people , which is a given is the amazing , healthy , vegetarian food ! so good so yes , nbtsc was good this year i still do n't really feel like it was life changing as such , but it was certainly good i befriended amazing people , had some great times , and yeah , it was just generally really good now , remember how i said i managed to stay healthy the whole week ? well , on saturday when my mom picked emi and i up from camp , i felt fine however , not long into the drive home , my throat started feeling scratchy talk about timing ! so i do have an actual cold now , but so far it 's mild knocks on wood so i'm not overly bothered i'm just hibernating for a few days while i get better , and then i'm going to go out into the world ! i do feel inspired in some ways , and i 've committed myself to making some changes in my life many fairly minor , one or two more major and , well , i 'll just have to see how that goes peace , idzie