i discovered an interesting article on unschooling teens today , titled teenage bohemia , and i was quite happy to find that it was very positive , as well as very surprised and rather flattered to see a brief mention of my blog title ! however , reading it got me thinking the teens featured in the article are all very busy outside of the home much of the time , doing tons of activities and it seems to me that most teenage unschoolers have that in common just yesterday , an unschooling friend of mine , on hearing how empty my schedule was , asked what do you do anyway ? what do i do ? well , my current main interests focus mainly around human behavior , anti civilizationism , unschooling , and environmentalism , and all of those things tie in very closely with each other i 've always said that i'm less interested in psychology , and more interested in sociology and anthropology , since although an individual 's behavior has always interested me , large group dynamics have always seemed far more interesting questions like how much human behavior is 'natural' , and how much stems from civilization ? how is human behavior different in different civilizations ? different parts of a country ? different parts of a city ? is there a difference in behavior between different social groups ? what are those differences ? on a smaller scale , i love people watching , and have always found the most popular people , in the sense of who gets the most attention from the most people , not popular with a capital 'p' , the most interesting their behavior affects the group they 're in the most , and it 's fascinating to watch how other people interact with them , and the ripple affects that their actions have perhaps that 's one reason that anti civilizationism fascinates me so much in reading about that , there 's a huge amount of sociology , pyscology , and anthropology involved how do did traditional aboriginal communities live ? why is our culture so different ? how is it different ? is it better ? how did we come to think that living this way is a good thing ? in reading about , and sharing the opinions of , anti authoritarian movements , quite possibly the most important thing about them is the emphasis on questioning , and not taking anything at face value propaganda , brain washing , and control are something that i 've also become highly aware of it 's a hobby of mine to listen to politicians , and explain what they 're attempting to get people to think with their words i love watching comercials and finding the unstated premisis on which they 're built something i notice most often is how advertisers presume people hate their lives , what the message is often it 's buy our product , it will give you momentary happiness in your dreary life , and whether or not i think it 's affective i also love environmentalism , and spend lots of time reading about how our civilization is literally destroying the world i can tell you how everything we use or consume , from toilet paper to beef to cd 's harms the earth i also spend a lot of time reading about unschooling , both in books , articles , and blogs is that doing nothing ? i do n't think so i feel much more of a kinship with the radical unschooling philosophy , since radical unschooling truly does consider everything you do to be learning i find that a lot , although certainly not all , unschoolers still put a lot of value on the concrete , visible , more school like learning i , however , happily sit on my couch , tearing appart commercials and explaining to my mom why i think cop shows enforce a certain way of looking at the world , and ultimately help those in power control people my brain is working while i do that it 's just that the only people who hear about the workings of my brain tend to be my family or close friends overall , i'm happy being at home most of the time , and not being super busy , unlike many unschoolers are that said , i do feel that my life is currently unbalanced , and that i should start some new activities since i left cadets and i have never regretted that descision , i feel that i am missing out on getting to observe group dynamics cadets taught me a lot , although none of it what they wanted to teach me i learned how wrong authority , hierchy and control is i learned how to tell when someone 's manipulating you i learned that brain washing is so effective because of course it 's very hard to detect unless you 're looking for it i learned that people are often very easy to control i learned a lot all right and i'm so , so glad i'm out of it ! but by the same token , my life has gotten too quiet i want to start doing some new activities that are in line with my beliefs , interests , and ethics but the big thing is , i want to get busier because that 's what i actually want , not because someone else thinks i should be ! and that , in my mind , is the essence of unschooling following what you feel is right for you , not what anyone else does peace , idzie you might also like unschooling and freedom debate continuing debate unschooling wrapping things up linkwithin