there are a handful of interviews with grown unschoolers to be found online , but in my mind , not enough so i 've decided to have a permanent as in , the link to it will live on the sidebar grown unschoolers questionnaire on my blog , that i'm going to invite any and all grown unschoolers to fill out ! if i get filled out questionnaires regularly , they will be posted regularly on this blog if i get them occasionally , they will be posted occasionally point being , there will unless no one at all is interested be a series of interviews with grown unschoolers coming up so , are you a grown unschooler i'm going to say and up younger unschoolers have just as wonderful things to say , but i 'd like this particular series of interviews to focus on older unschoolers ? would you mind answering a few questions ? well , here are said questions ! this is not an all or nothing deal feel free to ignore some questions if they do n't apply , or if you 're simply not interested in answering all i ask is that you please answer all three of the basics questions , and at least five questions beyond that the basics when did you become an unschooler ? how long have you unschooled did you unschool ? how old are you now ? do you have any siblings ? if so , did they do they unschool as well ? the decision to unschool if your parents chose unschooling , do you know how why they made that decision ? if you chose to leave school , can you talk a bit about what led to that decision , and how the actual process of leaving went how did your parents , friends , teachers , etc react ? what were the challenges you faced , and how did you overcome them ? the best and worst what do you think the best thing about unschooling is ? what do you think the worst or most difficult thing about unschooling is ? beyond high school did you decide to go are you going to college or university ? if so , could you talk a bit about that experience ? did you decide not to go to college or university ? if so , could you talk a bit about that experience , and what if anything you decided to do differently instead of college ? money earning and work are you currently earning money in any way ? what jobs ways of earning money do you , and have you , had ? have you found work that 's fulfilling and enjoyable ? have you found that unschooling has had an impact on how hard or easy it is to get jobs or earn money ? do you feel that unschooling has had an impact on what methods of earning money or jobs you 're drawn to ? general what impact do you feel unschooling has had on your life ? if you could go back in time , is there anything about your learning educational journey that you 'd change ? if you have children , are they unschooled ? alternately , if you were to have children , would you choose to unschool them ? advice what advice would you give to teens looking to leave high school ? what advice would you give to someone looking to skip , or to drop out of , college or university ? what advice would you give to unschooling parents or parents looking into unschooling ? is there anything else you 'd like to talk about or add ? remember , i'm not asking you to answer every single question unless of course you want to if you decide to fill it out , please email it to me at idziedesmarais gmail com i 'll edit for basic spelling and grammar mistakes , but nothing beyond that i 'd also ask that you please specify what name you 'd like to be used when the interview is posted first and last , just first , nickname , pseudonym , whatever it would also be great if you could include both a bio including website blog , if applicable , and between photos you doing cool stuff , just a portrait , whatever please also feel free to share this widely i feel like this could be a great resource , and i want to thank everyone in advance for your participation and or support ! you might also like grown unschooler chloe anne spinnanger the best thing grown unschooler jasmine carlson you do n't feel learning advice from a learning life grown unschooler cheyenne la vallee everyone has it in linkwithin