now , i usually avoid memes like the plague not the reading of them on other peoples blogs , i do n't mind that , but the doing of them however , i finally found a meme that i 'd actually like to share on this blog , because i think it 's pretty damn cool ! this meme is called f a b share film , audio , and book share in other words , sharing what you 're currently watching , listening to , and reading ! thanks to the blog holistic mama for introducing me to it doing this in order , since i occasionally get an urge to do things in an orderly fashion , first up is film which i'm considering to be watching , so including tv shows ! last night , i watched the th harry potter movie , harry potter and the half blood prince it just came out on dvd yesterday , and though i saw it in theaters , my harry potter nerd friend missed out on that experience , so really wanted to see it right away as soon as it was available ! ! the th hp book was probably my favourite i felt the characters had really matured and were much more interesting to read about because of that , i think i was expecting too much from the movie , so was rather disappointed a high point of the movie was malfoy , though , since i felt that they handled his character very well ! i 'd even go so far as to say that i liked the malfoy of this movie better than the more cowardly one of the books also , ron and luna were a pleasure to watch , as always in terms of tv shows , we , as a family , have been majorly obsessed with house lately we 've worked our way through season two season three and now we 've just started season four emi , mum , and i simply love the wonderful characters , terrific dialogue , and just find this show to be extremely enjoyable ! ! we 've even managed to drag my dad into the appreciation of this show , even if he does n't share the actual obsession ! my mum , emi , and i also just finished watching because the season just ended on tv the second season of being erica , which again , is more appreciated by the female members of my family p it 's a sweet , funny , moving , comedy drama that airs on cbc , and we 're thrilled with the fact that it 's canadian , as well ! so many of the shows that air on canadian television are actually american , so it 's really nice to find good shows that are n't ! moving on to the audio section , there 's been christmas music playing near constantly in the our house , lately most notably and by my choice , however , have been two great loreena mckennitt christmas cds to drive the cold winter away and a winter garden i 've been a fan of loreena mckennitt for a long while now my mom has liked her since i was born , and at some point while growing up , i decided that she was pretty cool , too ! lately i 've been making an effort to collect all of her lovely music and finally , books ! i 've read several very average teen fantasy books lately that i do n't feel are particularly worth mentioning other than that , i just finished for the sake of our children by leandre bergeron it was a good book , and it was also a review copy which means there will be a review of it posted on this blog soon the only reason i have n't already is that i 've been having trouble writing about any one subject for longer than a paragraph i also just started reading weapons of mass instruction by john taylor gatto because i'm barely into it , i do n't really have much to say about it yet hmmm , i think that 's it for now ! let me know if you think i should avoid all memes , even ones like this , in the future , or if i should put aside my usual aversions to memes if they 're cool enough peace , idzie