i feel bad that i have n't been blogging lately and even more than feeling bad , i miss it ! i miss pouring out whatever happens to be on my mind , figuring it out and coming to new understandings as my fingers dance across the keyboard but i 've found it difficult lately someone whom i'm close to has been ill , and the last several weeks have been hard the last couple of days i was at the hospital visiting i hate hospitals like really , truly , hate them yes , in our current system , with the way things work , we need them , and they most certainly save lives but that does n't mean i have to like the close walls , painted dull , lifeless colors , or the over heated rooms , or the smell of sickness and disinfectant i hate hospitals but since i think it 's extremely important that when in hospital people have those who care about them there as often as possible , i 've been putting in a fair amount of visiting hours so if you 've been wondering why i have n't been posting as often , that 's one of the reasons the other is that i 've been spending a lot of time talking on the phone , so somehow i feel like i 've been using up all of my words for the day which is entirely mental , and should n't affect my ability to blog i'm going to try and work on that an unschooling friend from boston is visiting in less than a week , which is really cool ! but also rather stressful , because the house is messy , and i was supposed to clean it especially my room , which cannot currently fit anyone extra now here 's something interesting to talk about my friend who is visiting is male , something that a surprisingly large amount of parents would have a problem with ! even knowing that we 're just friends i 've lately had a problem with that term , since it seems being just friends , as opposed to being in a relationship , is deemed somehow lesser , which i totally do not agree with , most parents would n't be comfortable with it yet my parents would let me , or my sister just pointing out this is n't based on age , invite pretty much anyone we wanted , regardless of gender or our relationship with them i just love my parents other news ? i started a day self portrait project , along with my general day photo project yes , i know i'm crazy and i forgot to take any pictures yesterday , what with coming home late from the hospital , and feeling absolutely exhausted ah well oh , and one other thing my sister and i are both writers , although my sister writes daily , mostly role playing , but also writing poetry , short stories , and occasional attempts at longer works , and i just blog , write poetry in sporadic bursts , and occasionally write a short story but anyway , we decided , since we both love talking about books so much , and want to pay closer attention to the actual writing craft or at least that 's how i feel , that we should both read the same book , write reviews maybe we could have a sisters book review blog ? we 'll see on it , then discuss it with each other , and basically tear it appart what was handled well , and what was n't ? were the characters fully realized , or two dimensional ? how was the dialogue ? was there a good hook at the beginning ? was the ending well done ? since it was late at night when we thought of this , but i still wanted to do a bit of book comparing tearing appart , we read the opening paragraph to several books , and decided whether or not we liked it i discovered that emi is a lot more analytical than me not that i did n't already know that i will try and write more i really will i miss my blog ! also , i want to thank all my readers twenty eight followers wow when i first started my blog , the only people who read it were my mom and sister now there are twenty eight people officially following my blog , and i know of other people who read it , and simply do n't officially follow it that makes me extremely happy , and i want to thank everyone who reads my blog , whether it 's regularly or occasionally , because you really make me feel like expressing my opinions , thoughts , and random feelings is a worthwhile endeavor thank you also , the fact that people read my blog makes me feel bad when i neglect it which is a good thing ! if i feel bad , i 'll write more p so i'm going to start writing more again or at least i'm going to try really hard to do so ! peace , idzie you might also like how i learned to write it involved a lot of reading ! insecurities and an anniversary three years blogging trips and ukuleles and anarchists , oh my ! this year in life including dogs , trips , zines and linkwithin