well , today was really really cool i talked to people online , just really pleasant conversations , then went shopping with my mom for some stuff while we were out , i did something i 've been planning to do for at least a week now buy hair dye and a bleaching kit i coulde n't get the exact shade i wanted , so i settled on a different shade of purple still pretty cool ! after supper , yet more shopping having already gotten the dye , i was extremely bouncy , hyper , and twitchy well , both looking forward to purple hair and worrying about camp , which is in a week now how time flies ! outside , in the early evening , was absolutely gorgeous like really , truly , beautiful it was cool , but not too cold crisp is the correct word , i believe the clouds were dark in the sky , still visible from the light of the fading sun on nights like this , spirits seem to fly when we arrived home , i could smell a wood stove i love the smell of burning on cool fall days more than almost anything inside , it was warm and cozy we were all in good moods , talking and laughing i'm a silly and told my mom i wanted purple horses instead of purple hair in french les cheveux hair and les chevaux horses sound very very similar ! so after much bouncing around in nervousness and exitement , i got my hair bleached which scared the crap out of me what if you get it in my eye and i go blind mom ? ! ? but went well then the beautiful dye , which both looked and smelled like acrylic paint , and got quite a nice shade if i do say so myself i took several different videos chronicling the different stages of the dyeing process , and will now post them ! i tried to upload them , but it failed ooh ! on that note , i got a new camera ! a canon powershot a which is quite cool plus i got it for just brand new so that 's why i'm having trouble downloading , because i have n't quite got everything figured out i 'll post the videos and pic 's as soon as i possibly can ! oh , and if my writing abilities do not seem to be up to scratch , it 's because i'm exhausted right now anyway , bed time ! peace you might also like purple hair , as promised ! fall days and new writing falling thoughts bad puns are cool what fall is looking like around my place linkwithin