remember the diy life zine ? the first issue with a selection of wonderful articles , poems , and artwork from some really great people was published around this time last year in december , i believe , and can be read here if you 'd like to check it out and , a year later , i'm looking to put together a second issue ! i have a few submissions i 've received over the last year , but not enough for a whole 'nother issue which is where you and your friends , if you want to pass the word along to someone you think might be interested come in ! what is diy life zine ? it 's a zine about doing things independently of experts , professionals , institutions , corporations , and similar things a zine about taking our lives , and our communities , into our own hands who can submit pieces to be considered and most likely accepted for the zine ? you and you , and you regardless of age , political view , whether you know me or just heard about this zine from a friend or another site , or anything else the only requirement is that it fits with the theme the theme is diy life , as described above in what is diy life zine what am i looking for ? submissions of articles , opinions , artwork , poetry , and anything else you want to send me i chose this theme because i feel it gives a ton of freedom in what you submit anything from physical diy projects , to articles on radical political philosophy , to education , lifestyle , and beyond ! while still retaining a more radical feeling and outlook as a side note , your submission can also be anti or against something you see as being opposed to a diy lifestyle i e schools , capitalism , whatever note that i'm also looking for cover art specifically ! to find out some more nitty gritty details like word count , go here , and to get some ideas of topics you could cover , go here what type of circulation does diy life zine have ? it 's available online , and that 's mostly how it circulates the first issue has been downloaded more than times , but i also encourage anyone who wants to to print out make copies and distribute them wherever to whoever they wish deadline for submissions is the end of december , so make sure you send stuff in before them ! to find out more about the zine , you can go to the diy life zine website , and if you have any questions , feel free to ask either in the comments here or by sending me an email at open eyed slave gmail com i was really excited with the terrific content featured in the first issue , and i'm excited to see what all of you have to share in the next issue ! you might also like first ever issue of diy life zine now available ! ! looking for submissions for the summer issue of diy life zine ! diy life zine now has it 's own website ! diy life zine table of contents linkwithin