i 've been thinking , and unless i'm much mistaken , i 've never actually told the story of how i came to be an an unschooler i simply popped up with a blog at age saying hey , i'm unschooled ! p so this is the story of how i came to be an unschooler ! some of it is taken from what my parents have said , since i was pretty young when some of this went down , but i 'll do my best to tell it accurately ! before i was born , neither of my parents had ever even considered homeschooling it just never entered their minds but my mom was , and still is , a hippie , so she did plan to breastfeed because of that , she joined the le leche leauge when i was born or possibly before i was born i do n't know how those things works ! p now , my mom had plenty of gentle discipline , unconditional parenting , type books , i was never let to cry , lived in a sling for ages , and all those other attachment parenting practices she never used that term , though i do n't know why she did n't she must have seen it used in all those books she read ! so she was the type who liked to keep her kids close , and be involved in their life at the le leche lauge , she was exposed to an idea she 'd never been exposed to before homeschooling and she liked it ! being the type of parent she was , she did n't like the idea of sending her precious little girl off to spend her days with strangers so she started reading and researching , and decided that she really did want to homeschool ! my dad , on the other hand , was less enthusiastic he 's the most traditional minded of my immediate family , and he thought school was best , so my mom agreed that they would at least try it out so off i went to half day kindergarten at age five ! i did n't really mind it neither did i love it i had fun sometimes , but i was always happy to head home afterwards , as well and i find it surprising that i actually remember that ! however , partway through the year , we started getting strange phone calls obscene phone calls , actually , and when they were traced yeah , my parents actually had the police trace them it was discovered that it was a kid in grade making them sad , eh ? so that about convinced my dad , and halfway through my first , and only , year of school , i was pulled out our homeschooling started out in a way that many unschoolers will be familiar with school at home ! well , sort of since this is my mom we 're talking about , we never had a schedule of any sort but she did buy a reading program sing , spell , read write ! shudders , and sort of tried to get me to do it regularly through that , i learned how to sound out words and stuff , though i did n't really read , per say , and we never ended up finishing the program for years our schooling is a bit of a blur , i'm afraid i was pretty young ! i know that we had various school books and programs and stuff , but the only thing i can ever remember my mom actually trying to force was math we did lots of fun science experiments , as well as watching nova and nature and similar shows avidly i say we , because my sister reached school age with no one ever suggesting she go to school , so we just continued to learn together ! my mom always read aloud to us , poetry , stories , the newspaper , and i started actually reading at age or when she was reading harry potter too slowly for my taste ! we never did book reports , though i 'd enthusiastically tell my mom about whatever book i was reading none of us considered that schooling we considered it life ! i memorized poetry , and wrote both poetry and stories before i could even read i 'd narrate them to mom my sister ad i would play spelling games for fun , and we relished our regular trips to the library , where we 'd get whatever books we wanted emi would always max out her card , ending up with huge piles of books that my mom and i would then end up carrying , since she was too little ! throughout this time period , my mom would tell everyone that we were doing child led homeschooling throughout that time , the only thing that she ever attempted i say attempted because she 'd often fail to force was math i was somewhere around or when i started completely refusing to do math workbooks , and , well , i guess that 's when we moved over to full fledged unschooling ! we did n't really know it , though , and i always felt , because my mom always felt , since she was surrounded only by public schoolers and homeschoolers , that we should be doing schoolwork ! we did n't , but i guess unschooling was n't fully embraced in our house until a mere couple of years ago when we fully , truly , embraced and accepted that what we were doing was right , it felt so much better ! i started reading and thinking and talking about it , and was just like wow , this really is a wonderful thing we 're doing ! i think that made my mom very happy she 'd known what we were doing felt right , but there had always been that fear , that what if , until i said gee mom , i like what we 've been doing ! p and the rest is history oh , and i invite my mom to make any corrections to my story if she so wishes p peace , idzie you might also like unschooling is forever part beginnings reasons i'm glad i grew up unschooling grown unschooler anna j cook the experience of how i learned to write it involved a lot of reading ! linkwithin