i'm sure everyone remembers how much i was fussing about turning how hard i was finding it , and how much i was dreading my birthday so , on the night of the th , the night before my birthday , i was rather surprised to find that , as i curled up in bed , the thought drifted through my head that tomorrow was my birthday , and all i felt was a faint glow of happiness on my birthday , the th of march , i woke up to a truly glorious day ! bright sunshine , and record breaking warm temperatures ! how could i not be cheerful ? i danced around the house with the sunlight streaming through the windows , and even when i woke my sister and we had a bit of a disagreement , it passed quickly and the day continued in it 's joyous flow our cat henry was being cute and playful , so i just had to pull out my camera to take pictures , and then emi curled up with him for a little while on my bed my mother came back with food for the full breakfast i 'd requested , and even though it was past by then , and she could n't find every ingredient on my list , it worked out wonderfully i 've found that when i let go of expectations of perfection , things often work out as well or better than i 'd originally imagined ! so we had a lovely late meal of vegetarian sausage with fried onions , spiced potatoes , scrambled eggs , good baguette , and sushi my mother , sister , and i ate together in the light filled kitchen 'twas good once we did n't feel quite as stuffed , emi and i headed out for a rambling walk there were birds singing , we saw a bluejay , and a bug of some sort flew over our heads we also saw and heard a flock of geese coming back for the summer as they flew by the ground was even dry enough in a local park that we could sit comfortably under a couple of trees and just talk i was thrilled that i was perfectly comfortable wearing just a light sweater ! really though , these words do n't seem an accurate description of that sunny day how do you put down on a page or screen the cry of a mourning dove as it sits on the wire in front of our house ? or the raggedy v of a flock of geese , the way their wings move ? or the precise way the light and shadows fall under three evergreen trees in an empty park ? i wish i had pictures , to help , at least a bit , in showing the absolute beauty of the day , but my camera is so big and heavy , and i was feeling so light and unencumbered that i did n't want to drag it along i 'd originally hoped to have homemade pizza for supper , and we 'd originally wanted to get out early to pick a cake , since in our family , it 's a tradition to get everyone a cake from this amazing bakery , premiere moisson , on their birthdays those cakes are not cheap , so we ca n't get them often , but everyone deserves one on their birthday ! ! now , we never got the homemade pizza made , and we had n't gotten the cake yet by the time my father arrived home , so my father , sister and i headed out to pick up both a cake and a pizza we drove along , car windows open , laughing and talking it was still gorgeously sunny , despite the fact the sun was getting closer and closer to the horizon at home we had supper , with much talking and laughing once again , and followed our supper with my birthday cake and a bottle of good dessert wine yummy of course , by the time we were done our leisurely meal , it was dark out , and i was longing to head outside again so emi and i sat on the front steps , with a candle and a bit of sage to burn , and just soaked up the beauty of the nighttime throughout the summer , i spend a lot of time outside after dark it was such a joy that it was warm enough to do so on my birthday without freezing ! ! we finally finished the day with playing some kingdom hearts i should mention at this point that i never play video games , usually , but that i decided , without any coercion , to play kingdom hearts with emi , and that i 've actually been enjoying it ! , singing some songs from our favorite song book , talking for a bit in that stillness unique to past at night , before finally going to sleep despite all my stressing about turning , and i'm still not thrilled with the age , i had a good birthday peace , idzie