this post came about when i was realizing just how many things , events and online groups and other things , that i wanted to let my readers know about and , well , once you have more than one or two , it seems pretty silly to give each one it 's very own post ! so here are some things i really think you should check out summer montreal unschoolers gathering smug this event , organized primarily by my wonderful mother debbie , is now in it 's third year , and i'm sure will be every bit as fun as it was the last two years ! for unschoolers and friends of unschoolers , unlike many overnight smug is a six day event unschooling events , this is not a conference , but instead a gathering of like minded people with the express purpose of hanging out and having fun not that unschooling conferences are n't also a ton of fun ! it also tends to have a very large percentage of young adults in attendance , so if you 're a grown unschooler this might be an especially good event to look into the first year there were also lots of young families , last year less , and this year i'm hoping there will be a nice mix of ages so yeah , it 's cool you should come join the yahoo ! group , and list yourself as going on the facebook event ! it 's been a little slow in the organizing stage because of a lot of things going on for my mother , but as long as we get enough people wanting to stay in the lodge we know we have enough people combined camping and lodge to make a good gathering , it 's just that we need a certain number in the lodge to get it all to ourselves , it 's going ahead and it 's gonna be great ! smug , photo credit patrick morris stuff worth sharing network my sister emilie just launched a facebook group yesterday , aimed especially at the unschooling community ! as the description says this group is about giving , trading , recycling , and generally providing for and receiving from your community ! you can offer and ask for items , a place to stay on your travels , help with learning a skill , etc i hope that this can be a tool to help unschoolers get things , be it help with a project or that rare book they 've been searching for , that they ca n't find locally check it out here freedom based education events montreal i started this mailing list for sharing freedom based , radical , and alternative education events happening in and around montreal , and then have n't really done anything with it yet i really want to change that , because i really think it 's important ! from the description for several years i 've been as involved as i can be with the freedom based education community in montreal during that time i 've often been frustrated at how far flung and disconnected the various people and groups interested and involved in freedom based education are , and how hard it often is for people wanting to get involved to know where to start so i 've started this list in an attempt to remedy those issues , to help people get involved and stay involved in the various events and projects going on , to connect with each other , and to help build momentum in this growing movement join the mailing list here ! anything else you think other readers of this blog might want to know about ? events , groups , etc ? share them in the comments ! you might also like the summer montreal unschoolers gathering smug is the summer montreal unschoolers gathering summer montreal unschoolers gathering come join us for the first ever summer montreal linkwithin