i think most people know how much i love unschooling by now i will happily wax on about how unschooling is the only type of truly free education , how unschooling has made my life better , and allowed me to become a truly authentic person , which i'm not sure i would have managed in school , etc etc etc but what about the downsides of unschooling yes , you read that right ? that is n't talked about much by unschoolers , quite understandably when you 're trying to convince the rest of the world that unschooling is a good thing , you do n't want to bring up the difficulties attached to it because there are some difficulties nowhere near insurmountable ones , but there nonetheless note that this is n't the typical homeschooling methods pros and cons list a balancing of the supposedly good and supposedly bad elements , so that you can decide whether or not this style is right for you this is simply a few things that i 've found especially hard to deal with , as an unschooler what i find to be sad is that every single con i can think of is n't really to do with unschooling per say it 's to do with how the world , and individual people , view unschooling ! so here are some of the things that i 've found to be difficult to deal with , to do with unschooling some of these things hold true for homeschooling as well firstly , the constant questioning constant as a young child , it 's do you have a ped day the teacher 's education days in quebec , where the kids get the day off since the teachers are in class ! ? why are n't you in school ? do you know how to read ? and similar annoying things as you get older , the questions change it 's are you planning on going to school now ? tinged with severe disapproval it 's ignorant comments like i once met a homeschooler who had no social skills ! while scrutinizing you to see if you 're about to start exhibiting similar signs of lack of socialization when i was young , and we still just said we were homeschoolers , i 'd simply answer questions as neutrally as possible , just trying to end the conversation as soon as i could as i got older and we started using the word unschooler , which was fairly recently , the reactions changed somewhat mostly , the word unschooling is met with puzzlement after an explanation of what it is , it 's often still met with puzzlement no , my mom did n't teach me , i taught myself ! repeated patiently , as people struggle to grasp such a foreign concept ! if it is understood , it 's often met with extreme skepticism and or disapproval and or outright horror sometimes people are supportive , sometimes they 're honestly curious and not trying to be judgmental but the point of all this is just to say that as an unschooler , you 're constantly answering for the educational choices you 've made another thing i 've found to be difficult is the lack of a support network nearby at this point , many , many places have homeschool support groups , homeschool co ops , and similar things unschooling , however , is still a small enough percentage that most places do n't have that support for unschoolers now , unschooling is , after all , basically a type of homeschooling it 's so different from every other type of homeschooling , that i often find myself forgetting that fact , but it is true ! , so sometimes the local homeschooling groups can be great for unschoolers as well sometimes , though , they 're not i know that in my pre teenage years , we were involved with a lot of local homeschooling groups and activities however , the people in these groups were mostly very christian , and very school at home i did n't make very many friends through the homeschooling community a few , but not many and often felt pretty out of place the general mindset was just very different from my family 's ! doubts are also an issue pretty much everyone has them , no matter what type of education you have , but i think it may just be even harder for unschoolers , at times when enough of the world doubts how well unschooling can work , it 's quite easy to fall into the habit of doubting it yourself ! not having a graduation or similar distinction that you 're now in adulthood can also be difficult some homeschoolers organize graduations , and i'm sure this is great for some unschoolers as well but it would n't mean anything to me what am a graduating from ? ? i'm still learning , still growing , as i will be until the day i die having someone hand me an embossed piece of paper on a stage does n't really mean much , for me ! so as an unschooler , it 's quite likely you 'll have to find that something special for yourself for some it will be moving out on their own for others starting college for some traveling i'm really not sure if i 've found that special something for me yet i know that this blog has given me something previously , the only people who read what i wrote were family and friends people who were pretty much obligated to like what i wrote ! getting validation for my writing , and just for me , from such a wide base of people has certainly meant a lot to me , and i'm sure has also contributed to my growth in confidence and self assurance ! come to think of it , i'm not so sure that this whole point really is a con after all it 's probably better to find your own personal graduation than to have nothing more than a piece of paper saying you 've graduated ! unschooling often is n't n easy path doing anything that is n't normal or expected often is n't easy , and if you 're an unschooler , who believes in unschooling , you have no one to blame but yourself i think that may be one of the hardest things about unschooling , actually the fact that you 're really and truly the only one in control of your own life these are just a few thoughts some things that have been bouncing around in my head for a while now i love unschooling i am so grateful to have lived as free a life as i have , and i do n't think any of these things are nearly big enough for someone to decide not to unschool but at the same time , i think people often minimize just how difficult it can be , at times , to live in a society that is so very far away from the lifestyle that you lead as an unschooler ! as always , i 'd love to hear your thoughts peace , idzie