last night , my sister , mother , and i attended an unschooling meeting it was advertised as an unschooling meeting , but really what the woman who 's organizing it wants is to start a democratic school the building she 's renting is gorgeous ! the main floor is one large open room with bathrooms and an office coming off of it , with a large open upstairs room with a curtain drawn across one end of the room to create a meditation area as well as a dugout basement the building itself used to be a house , and must be about years old a few years ago it was renovated , and now the floors , walls , and ceilings are all a beautiful honey coloured wood if you have n't guessed , i love this place ! marilyn the woman who 's starting this thing is interested in this place mainly being used by teens , both unschooled , homeschooled , high school rise outs , and teens who are currently in school , but interested in doing more or finding out more about unschooling the school will be run entirely be the teens , with all decisions finance , projects , workshops , classes , which adults parents are invited to work with the teens and kids based on consensus decision making although it 's basically starting with high school aged kids in mind , the plan is be welcoming of both younger children and cegep college aged people pretty cool , eh ? the space will also be used for unschooling parent support groups , activities and play groups for the younger ones , and possibly as a space for teens to run businesses out of last night only a small group showed up , and emi and i were the only teens , but there 's going to be a meeting just for the teens interested in running this place soon this whole project is very exciting ! in other interesting news , a facebook gift exchange was started you post a note offering to make a unique gift for the first people who respond , then send it to them by mail if you respond to a note asking for a gift , you must re post the note and send gifts to people who respond to your note ! this thing is spreading like wild fire i 've been tagged a billion times , and even my mom got tagged by a couple people now ! really cool so now i 'll be receiving gifts in the mail , and i need to make and send gifts actually , gifts , because several people commented that they were sad they missed it , and i do n't want them to be sad ! so i'm making a bunch of stuff , it seems p i'm thinking about the things you guys asked me to talk about in future vlogs thank guys ! and i 'll try and record a new vlog post soon peace , idzie you might also like unschooling support group starting an unschooling group in our area ! blame unschooling ! unschooling beyond high school unschooling is forever part linkwithin