ages ago i was given the lemonade award by linda of amy 's journey unschooling through high school thanks so much linda ! the award is for blogs with attitude and or gratitude and recipients are then asked to pass the award on to other blogs now , this is really hard for me ! i follow around blogs , and i really do read most of them most of the time ! i love reading about other peoples experiences , opinions , everyday happenings in their lives but i'm going to try and narrow it down to the ones i read right away when i see that there 's a new post , the ones that i frequent most often , lately so here they are ! sheila of always exploring one of my best friends that i have never actually met , sheila is a fellow grown unschooler who writes beautifully and with passion about such diverse subjects as music , spirituality , natural childbirth , and simply what 's going on in her life eli of eli gerzon 's worldschooler blog written by a grown unschooler worldschooler who now leads travel tours for unschoolers to various interesting places , this wonderful blog discusses unschooling , worldschooling , world travel , and similarly fascinating things danya of made of carbon danya finished public high school , but having learned about unschooling , decided that , for one year , she would follow that lifestyle , and see what happened ! i greatly enjoy reading about her journey michelle of natural attachment a marvelous blog by an anarchist radical unschooling mom , that talks about and shows in lovely pictures their day to day life , as well as discussing various aspects of radical unschooling stella of not an ordinary teen no matter how bad a day i 've had , stella can make me laugh ! stella is an unschooling teen who 's passionate about dance , and her blog is always a joy to read ps pirro of over the wall an unschooling green anarchist mom and author of reasons why i'm an unschooler , i love reading this very political , and very well written , blog andrea of saying yes boys it 's strange to say , but this blog almost makes me feel like i'm a kid again ! chronicling the adventures of a radical unschooling family with younger kids , i just love to see all of the adventures they go on , and the freedom and joy in the boys faces james of how i learn stuff unschooling dad and author of secrets of a buccaneer scholar , i love his very logical and very respectful approach to things anna of adversarian written by an unschooling teen and dealing almost exclusively with unschooling and learning in general , this blog is quite enjoyable majikfaerie it 's rather strange to say , but i do n't know her name ! what i do know is that she 's a world traveling unschooling mom , and i love reading about and seeing in photo 's the places she goes and things she does so there you have it ! i hope you enjoy the blogs listed above peace , idzie you might also like my blog is nominated in the homeschool blog awards ! voting is open for the homeschool blog awards ! happy st birthday to this blog ! a list of blogs by teenage and grown unschoolers linkwithin