there are many reasons i do n't like store bought shampoos , deodorants , soaps , creams , and other bodycare products even the natural ones , though mostly better than your average pharmacy brands , have chemicals i 'd really rather not use , and also tend to be really pricey ! i decided a while ago that there must be better options , and i'm slowly but surely going diy for all of the products i used to buy from the store recently , i 've been discovering more and more things that baking soda only about a box can be used for and used very effectively , no less ! so i wanted to share a few of them that i 've tried so far shampoo or , going no 'poo , as people often say i used to use kiss my face shampoos , which worked just like your general shampoos , minus most of the more harmful chemicals the downside ? high cost about a bottle , and it left my hair dry , so i needed to use their conditioner regularly as well so when i started hearing reading , really about this no 'poo thing online , i became interested could this be the answer i was looking for ? so i decided to try it out i mean really , what was there to lose ? if it worked , great , and if it did n't , i could just go back to regular shampoo ! usising various online place as guides , i stopped using shampoo late last september , and have been no 'poo since then ! after a bit of trial and error , i discovered that around teaspoons of baking soda dissolved in a spritzy bottle with cup of water works perfectly most people talk about how there 's a transitioning period when you first make the switch , but i did n't even find that the case with me ! the baking soda method , right from the start , worked just as well as conventional shampoo i pour small quantities of this mixture on to each part of my scalp , massaging my scalp with fingertips and nails as i go , let it sit for about a minute , then rinse it out i know that many people like to use a diluted apple cider vinegar rinse afterward as a conditioner , but i 've personally found that it just makes my hair get greasy faster as for how frequently i wash my hair when i first switched to baking soda i used the same schedule as i had with shampoo , which means i was washing every other day but i quickly started stretching the time between washes , knowing that it was healthier for my hair , and have been washing my hair about every five days for a while now toothpaste now traditional toothpaste has a lot of not so pleasant ingredients ! i always feel uncomfortable using it so i 've tried making my own toothpaste using baking soda , salt , and vanilla extract for flavoring i feel like peppermint would be better , but i did n't have that extract in the house ! my feelings on it have been mixed it works reasonably well , but my mouth just does n't feel as clean as when i use regular toothpaste maybe i just need to make a homemade mouthwash as well ? my experimentation with healthier tooth care is definitely not over , but lately i'm afraid to say that i have been using normal toothpaste most of the time deodorant my most recent experiment homemade deodorant ! i used chemically deodorant for years , then for the past several years i 've used mainly the health food store alternatives but i 've never found any of them to work particularly well not that it 's usually much of a problem , since i do n't tend to be a very stinky gal at all note that i'm not even going to go into the whole why is it a bad thing that people smell like people thing , though i definitely have a lot of feelings on that , especially the natural brands , which sort of work for a couple of weeks before they stop working entirely so when i found this recipe , i decidely immediately to try it ! i 've only used it a couple of times , but i can happily say that so far it works better than any natural or chemically deodorant i 've ever used ! and i 've seriously put it to test with lots of exercise and long hours of wear seriously impressive ! just rub a little bit of oil i use olive oil with a drop of tea trea oil on armpits after showering , then dab on a bit of baking soda could n't be simpler ! i know that baking soda is healthy for your body however , i have n't been able to find out whether its production is harmful to the environment or not , so if you know anything about that , i 'd love to hear it ! i 'd also love to hear what you use for body care do you buy regular stuff ? maybe get your products from the local health food store ? do you make your own ? do n't use any ? it always seems that in the comment sections on posts about homemade stuff people have plenty of interesting tips , tricks , and experiences to share , so i 'd love to hear yours ! you might also like a year in posts green anarchy making a zine , and looking for submissions ! ! first ever issue of diy life zine now available ! ! linkwithin