i hesitated about posting this on the blog , since most of my readers are not local , but finally i figured what the hell ? maybe some local peeps who read will be interested ! so here 's some info i just sent out on local lists about a workshop i 'll be facicilitating next week what is this ? blogging blogging can be a wonderfully versatile form of self and public expression you can use it as a journal to showcase your art photography , painting , comics , short stories , longer stories to share a subject you 're knowledgeable about , or to document the process as you learn about a brand new subject to keep people up to date on a community project to provide support and information , to make connections with others , and a thousand other uses basically ? blogging is really cool ! in this workshop , we 'll aim to have every attendee figure out what they want their blog to be about , then set up an account and blog with blogger a free platform that lets you create and customize blogs we 'll also dicuss networking with other bloggers , building a readership , and other relevant blogging basics though this is a one time workshop , there 's the possibility , if attendees are interested , in continuing to learn and share through a blogging club experienced bloggers who want to share their knowledge and experience are also very welcome to attend ! who is it for ? anyone , homeschooled , unschooled , or schooled , who is in their teens through early 's how much does it cost ? nothing ! where is it ? in st henri , montreal email idzie at unschooledwriter gmail com for exact location when is it ? tuesday , october , at pm who 's hosting the workshop ? the workshop is being organized through the brand new imagine education resource centre for teens and young adults http www centreimagineeducation ca english php , and being facilitated by idzie desmarais bio idzie often refers to herself as an unschooling vegetarian animistic green anarchist feminist hippie child she dropped out of kindergarten , and instead grew up pursuing her varied passions and figuring things out in her own time she became passionate about unschooling and freedom based education in her late teens , and in the several years since she 's established a well known blog entitled i'm unschooled yes , i can write yes i can write blogspot com , attended multiple unschooling conferences and gatherings , spoken about unschooling at various events , and has had articles appear in several education related publications life learning magazine our schools , our selves homeschooling horizons for more information on this workshop , including where it 's being held , contact idzie at unschooledwriter gmail com for more information on the center , contact marilyn at marilyn educationevolution org i hope to see you there ! idzie unschooledwriter gmail com you might also like happy th blogging anniversary unschooling zine favorite unschooling posts on this blog of insecurities and an anniversary three years blogging anarchist bookfair this weekend ! linkwithin