wow , long time no post compared to what i usually do , anyway ! and i do n't even have a good excuse ! but anyway , i did not decide to write a post about the fact i have n't been writing posts , so i will move on my family is not christian not even close , really ! i'm animistic and generally spiritual without being religious at all , my dad comes from a catholic background but is n't exactly a believer , my mom is spiritual and does n't really like to label herself , and emi refers to herself as a superstitious agnostic quite a bunch , are n't we ? however , like many north americans , we celebrate christmas each year both sides of the family are christian to a greater or lesser extant , so i suppose it 's logical that we do and i love christmas , i really do the glorious music even the religious music i just love christmas music ! , the christmas tree glowing softly in a darkened room , great feasts , glittering decorations , and yes , christmas presents i ca n't imagine , and would n't want to , stop celebrating christmas ! however , i do n't feel a special significance in what christmas is celebrating i could honestly care less about the birth of the baby jesus so for the past couple of years , i 've wanted to celebrate the solstice marking and taking joy in the natural cycles of the earth now that makes more sense to me so , although i know few people who live nearby who would appreciate such a celebration and when i say few i mean one , other than my immediate family , unless someone else i 've overlooked pops into my head , and actually take it seriously , i'm still going to have a small celebration myself i will drag my family along for the ride , make some lovely decorations out of natural materials dragged out of our local woods , cook some tasty food , light some beeswax candles i 've been moving away from petroleum based ones , and just have a good time so that is my plan for the holidays ! in zine news , i now have all the stuff i need ! woo hoo ! i want to send out a big thanks to everyone who sent stuff in i now have the slightly intimidating task of putting it all together in an actual zine , instead of just a pile of papers i say slightly intimidating because there has been a lot of interest i find it slightly unnerving that there are many people enthusiastically waiting to read it s also , i 've been putting thought into what style i want it to be it could be more magazine y , with columns and a more professional look , or more traditional zine y , with scissors and glue and different fonts and handwritten bits , and i 've decided after very little thought to go with the latter the unique , artistic , free form style of zines is what drew me to them in the first place , so i do n't think going for an overly shiny look is the best idea ! p oh , and i just have to mention that i ca n't believe it 's december already ! time passes too fast ! i need to be thinking about buying gifts , and helping to clean the house , and all those other holiday preparatory things peace , idzie you might also like christmas ' first ever issue of diy life zine now available ! ! christmas celebrations diy life zine now has it 's own website ! linkwithin