there are five ryerson graduate students making a documentary about unschooling , which is pretty exciting ! today , i spent a little while talking on skype to the reporter for the story , about growing up unschooled , and some other basic questions they 're still looking for both a grown unschooler and an unschooling family , in the toronto area , who would be willing to be interviewed filmed , so if you 're interested , let me know and i 'll put you in touch ! right after that , i started looking through my to respond folder , which stretches back several months , and feeling really guilty about all of the unschooling questions people have asked that i 've yet to answer and then i started thinking how easy it is to answer questions on skype how i both usually enjoy it more , and how it takes about five minutes on skype to answer a question that would take me fifteen minutes if i were to answer it in email thinking about phrasing and proofreading and all that when answering questions about unschooling via email , i feel like i'm just writing a private post ! no less effort goes into it so i thought hey , i can tell people that if they want to ask me questions , add me on skype , arrange a time to chat through email , or just poke me if i'm online ! but then , quick on the heels of that thought , came the thought that lots of people like asking me questions grown unschoolers are n't always easy to find , and thus are in high demand when they are found ! what if that ends up taking up a lot of time ? at which point another idea came along what if i put up a donation button ? and said that i am happy to answer questions for anyone who feels a need to ask , and do n't expect any compensation , but if you want to give me a little something for my time , if you have it to spare , that would be really great so the point of this post is simply to ask if you think this is a horrible idea , or if this might just be a good one ? i have this huge feeling that what i say is so not worth anyone spending their money on , but if it 's an entirely optional donation button and is just sitting there if people want to use it , then it 's out of my hands and thus in theirs , right ? you can probably tell i'm very unsure of this idea that popped into my head a mere fifteen minutes ago so , your feedback is very much appreciated ! you might also like against the current talk from the toronto unschooling the frustration of being that unschooled person grown unschooler anna j cook the experience of blame unschooling ! linkwithin