so , in case you could n't guess , i'm home ! ! i had a really great week , spent time with many truly wonderful people , and took way too few pictures but i 'll do my best to tell the story with only a few shots last saturday , we headed off toward pittsburgh , to stay with a family we met at last years uwwg we were originally supposed to arrive much earlier , but by the time we actually got there it was midnight , and by the time we all stopped talking and hanging out in favour of bed , it was pat am ! emi , mum and i were thrilled to find out that not only were jody , bethany , timmy , sam awesome people , they were also just as much night owls as we are grins the time we spent with the hagensen 's was great , and involved lots of conversations around the table in the sunny kitchen , about a variety of topics i love how with unschoolers , age matters so much less between our two families , there were ages , , , , , and parents i do n't think they 'd be thrilled if i tried to add their ages as well , and all of us would happily sit around talking to each other that just makes me really happy as do the hagensen 's i really hope i get to see all of them again soon ! here are sam , emi , and timmy playing smash bros on nintendo their adorable , fluffy , crazy , cat is n't he cute ? on monday , we headed to the kalahari , for the third annual unschoolers winter waterpark gathering ! we took timmy along for the ride , since his family was leaving a bit later in the day , and he wanted to have as much time as possible there ! on the way , we spotted the official girls gone wild bus seriously we found that hilarious ! yeah , i know you can hardly see it but trust me , that 's what it was ! the first night there i was sooo tired i nearly fell asleep in john taylor gatto 's keynote address ! that first day though , it struck me how very different it was for me just a year from my first unschooling conference i knew so many people ! i could barely take two steps without running into someone to hug hello , chat with , or just enthusiastically wave hi to i was even greeted by a lovely gift in one case it was a truly great feeling the next day , i attended john taylor gatto 's workshop i find what he has to say very interesting , though i do n't agree with all of it he 's very libertarian , and i'm definitely not , so i found myself feeling uncomfortable with some of the surrounding assumptions and beliefs in many of his statements regardless , i really enjoyed his talk , and found that he seemed like a genuinely nice guy not arrogant at all , and very friendly it 's blurry , but that 's him ! the conference centre was filled with hoards of happy teenagers people with interesting clothing and cheerful goofing off i enjoyed myself , spending time in the waterpark and in the conference centre , with teens and with parents sadly , since i'm the photographer here , i have no pictures of me having fun ! grins we also had the great pleasure of seeing the world premiere of the short documentary about not back to school camp ! this film is seriously , absolutely and completely , amazing it captures so perfectly what nbtsc is i love it both emi and i can also be glimpsed in several scenes i highly suggest you watch it now ! ! not back to school camp a glance within from allen ellis on vimeo on wednesday there was a marketplace , complete with advertisers ! emi was very happy with the stuff she sold , and felt she got a good idea of what sold well and what did n't , what price ranges worked , and similar useful info she also met some very kind and helpful people , who shared their experiences with both selling handmade items and traveling a friend kept her company while she sold her creations emi introduced one of her favorite games , werewolves , to her friends , and they played some pretty intense rounds , or at least so i 've heard apparently playing werewolves is much more fun than dancing you know , i really do n't have all that much to say i hung out with awesome people , had lots of cool conversations , played in the waterpark , went to a couple of talks of course , that 's a lot of stuff but at the moment , i do n't really feel equipped to elaborate on all of that ! so i 'll just say that i had a good time oh , i did also get to meet a few blogging and twitter peeps whom i had n't met before , which was cool , and got to know some people whom i 'd only met briefly at earlier conferences and gatherings , which was also great ! on friday , we left the kalahari , with much sadness after an unschooling gathering , home seems pretty lonely i really want to make sure that i keep in touch with people this year ! but anyway , we left the kalahari and headed to my grandfathers , whom i have n't seen in several years i was a bit nervous about seeing my granddad and step grandma , honestly having had only brief phone calls for the last few years , it felt a bit strange to be visiting but i'm really , really glad we did ! it was really great to see them , and i was a rather sad when it was time to leave the next day my step grandmother and my grandfather , with their adorable but very yappy little doggy me , my grandfather , and emi then , on saturday , we came home it 's always surreal coming back home after being away the tap works the same way , the dishes are all in the right spots , and the bed is in the same state of dissaray it was when i last saw it , yet it all seems different somehow i should mention that the tuesday we were away , we got some bad news my great grandmother , eileen boyle caputo , passed away at age on the day we left , saturday the th of february i was n't very close to her , having only known her in her later years , but my mom was , and it hit her hardest i do n't think any of us really thought she was going to die soon she always seemed like the energizer bunny you just expected her to keep going forever ! so i will leave things at that for now i hope everyone had a great week , and there are , as there often are , several post ideas bouncing around in my head , that will hopefully turn into actual posts soon ! peace , idzie