wow i feel like i have n't blogged in forever ! it 's less than a week since i last posted , but considering how often i had been posting , it feels like a while so , the reason i stopped blogging was that i got a cold on sunday and suddenly , everything just seemed like too much effort ! i'm still sick and feeling all clogged up , and really hoping this cold will pass before we leave for the unschooling winter water park gathering on sunday i'm getting worried ! i know i was supposed to post a 'week in the life of an unschooler' thing , but i failed at that , since i completely forgot to keep track of what i 've been doing ! so i 'll have to do that some other time yesterday , my mom and i made sushi and i absolutely love sushi ! so i figured i 'd chronicle the sushi making in photographs , then post them here ! sushi rice , which is especially sticky so the roll stays together this time we used cucumber , jalapeno and spinach seasoned tofu , raw spinach , avocado , and carrots only the cuke and tofu are pictured , though nori seaweed with the rice spread on it the lovely filled rolls lots and lots of delicious vegetarian sushi eaten with wasabi paste , soy sauce , and pickled ginger , this is one of my favorite meals ! in other news , i'm reading comics which i do not normally do however , i absolutely love neil gaiman 's sandman series the only reason i even picked it up was that my father had brought home the absolute sandman vol from the library , and the large size , weird cover art , and embossed , textured cover that reminded of a bible , drew me in of course , all references to religion end there ! or , not really the stories are extremely eclectic , drawing from world mythology , legends , and biblical stories , and are often extremely interesting the books often read quite a bit like a collection of separate short stories , although as you continue , the common veins that connect all of the individual story lines become apparent i love how the only constant character in each individual little tale is dream of the endless , the endless being six siblings who can be more closely compared to the horsemen of the apocalypse than anything else dream is such an amazingly cool character according to emi , i have a fangirl crush on him , but that is completely untrue shifty eyes annnnyway , i'm now nearly done volume , and it 's really good , although definitely aimed at an adult mature audience if reading about seeing horror , gore , nudity , sex , or stuff like that makes you uncomfortable , then this is not the series for you that said , it 's still a great series ! oh , and i made a new post on my much neglected trash blog as well i 'll make sure to post before i leave on sunday ! peace , idzie