it seems for many , quite possibly most , people , going into a new situation group can be rather intimidating perhaps especially for something like an unschooling conference , where you really care about being part of that community , learning more about that lifestyle , and meeting others who are following a similar path i 've heard from a few people that they were worried they 'd feel out of place , and from a few people who did feel out of place at their first conference ! i was worried about this , too and i 've felt out of place as well but not anymore ! my first ever exposure to other unschoolers was not back to school camp in september of i was pretty nervous going there all alone , and when i arrived at the camp , there were what seemed like hundreds of people rushing around and yelling and hugging and being exuberant i just wanted to find a little hole to curl up in ! i got a cold nearly instantly , i felt pretty miserable and shy , and kept mostly to myself , so the week was kind of rocky it was only on the last day i realized that i had actually managed to make a couple friends , despite how much i 'd hid in a corner ! five months later , in february , i went , along with my mother and sister , to the unschoolers winter waterpark gathering it was the first conference we went to ! aside from a handful of people i 'd met but not hung out with much at camp , we knew no one , and i found it pretty nerve wracking there also were n't many people near my age , and although i 'll just as happily befriend younger folk individually , i feel pretty out of place in groups of younger teens , so i kind of bounced between different people , older and younger , for much of the time i enjoyed a lot of talks , and did make friends with a few awesome people , though ! the northeast unschooling conference in august , was the last gathering were i felt out of place at all i really still felt like a newbie at first , and was really shy , but i quickly started to have a good time , got to know people whom i 'd previously met better , and made new friends that sounds strangely young and cute i made new friends , mommy ! , and ended up having a really wonderful time ! by the end of the conference , i did n't feel like an outsider anymore not back to school camp followed shortly after , in september , and it was awesome ! when i arrived , to all the same yelling and hugging and exuberance as the year before , i was surprised to find i was n't intimidated at all i cheerfully greeted people , new and old , chattered happily , and just felt really relaxed i kept waiting for the ohmygawdi'minagiggroupiwannahide thing to hit , but it never did ! i knew at least half the people there , at least by sight , and i got to know a ton of really awesome people that week for this years unschoolers winter waterpark gathering , it 's been great feeling like we 're really a part of the unschooling community ! a couple of people offered to share a suite with us it did n't end up working in either case , sadly , and people have asked us if we 're going to be there , because they want to see us we 've asked if various people are going to be there , because we want to see them ! i'm looking forward to seeing old friends , and meeting many new ones really , the point of all this is just to say that , to start with , going to unschooling events can be a scary proposition it 's easy to feel like an outsider , easy to be shy , and easy to think everyone there has known each other forever which often is n't true ! but it really does n't take long to no longer feel like the new guy gal ! you 'll undoubtably meet great people , and it really is a wonderful community to be a part of peace , idzie