Life on Earth may have begun 300 million years earlier than previously thought (theguardian.com). If true, it would mean life began 4.1 billion years ago.

How NSA can break trillions of encrypted Web and VPN connections (arstechnica.com). "It turns out that only a few large primes are commonly used." Oops.


El Niño keeps getting stronger, raising chance of California rain (latimes.com). For me this is very significant. I moved to L.A. in mid-August. From August 19 to October 17, there was only one day of measurable rain. Hot and dry the whole time.

Who’s the alpha male now, bitches? (London Review of Books). What's in the manifestos left behind by killers?


More statistics at Statista

Modern humans out of Africa sooner than thought (news.yahoo.com), by about 70,000 years.

U.S. lawsuits build against Monsanto over alleged Roundup cancer link (reuters.com). "At least 700 lawsuits against Monsanto or Monsanto-related entities are pending." But that includes all lawsuits, for all Monsanto products, not just glyphosate.

Many plastics labeled 'biodegradable' don't break down as expected (phys.org).

Kids Who Use Computers Heavily in School Have Lower Test Scores, Major Worldwide Study Finds (alternet.org).

Walmart's entire business model is crumbling (businessinsider.com). One problem is that employee turnover is running about 5% per month. Replacing Walmart's entry-level employees costs about $1 billion a year. See also:

Why Retailers Are Suddenly Desperate to Keep Their Least-Valuable Workers (bloomberg.com).

Tennessee’s First Year Of Drug Testing Welfare Applicants Didn’t Go Very Well (thinkprogress.org). Surprise! Only 0.19% of benefits applicants are drug addicts.

Survey On Women Scientists Guides Respondents To Sexist Conclusions (forbes.com).

America Is Due for a Revolution (nypost.com).

❉

A big thank-you to all the great people who retweeted me yesterday: 




Buy my books (or click to find out more, at least):
Have you added your name to our mailing list? Thank you. Be well.