Only 7.7 million people have ever done 50 or more posts on Google+. Hard Numbers for Public Posting Activity on Google Plus (stonetemple.com). Various stats show Google+ to be, far and away, the biggest social network no one ever uses. But it lives on, because Google.

Meanwhile, neuroscience shows there are many reasons we keep returning to Facebook. The Secret Psychology of Facebook: Why We Like, Share, Comment and Keep Coming Back (blog.bufferapp.com).

Americans are spending $153 billion a year to subsidize McDonald’s and Wal-Mart’s low wage workers (wahsingtonpost.com). Ken Jacobs, Chair of the UC Berkeley Center for Labor Research and Education, writes about the fact that in the U.S., most social-program spending (52%) goes to people who already work for a living. Minimum wage is thus corporate welfare, plain and simple.

Warren Buffett, meanwhile, says raising the minimum wage "will hurt the poor" (bloomberg.com). And also war is peace, freedom is slavery, ignorance is strength.

By the way, that magical, mythical world in which McDonald's pays workers $15 an hour? It's called Australia.

Foxconn buildings are surrounded by netting to prevent suicide.
At Apple's Foxconn sweatshop supply facility in Shenzhen, China, suicides (totalling 19 in 5 years) seem to have subsided now that buildings have been completely surrounded by netting to keep workers from jumping to their deaths. Apparently the netting is a cost-effective alternative to, say, paying people more, or providing more humane work conditions. Where Apple Products Are Born: A Rare Glimpse Inside Foxconn’s Factory Gates (recode.net).

In 50-49 vote, US Senate says climate change not caused by humans (bangordailynews.com). I feel so reassured now. Don't you?

In Wisconsin, a bill to prevent Food Stamp recipients from buying shellfish (thinkprogress.com). What's with this creepy punish-the-poor fetish lately?

7 reasons why ‘I’ve got nothing to hide’ is the wrong response to mass surveillance (amnesty.org).

One Nation, Under Guard (NYTimes.com).

When A Rising Tide Sinks Most Boats (jacobinmag.com).

Why Are US Special Operations Forces Deployed in Over 100 Countries? (thenation.com)

In addition to well-known military bases around the world, the U.S. has around 11,000 Special Operations ("badged") personnel in 70 to 100 countries at any one time.

 ☙ ❧

Tired of lies and half-truths about mental illness? Arm yourself with some facts. Check out my free book Mental Health Myths Debunked. Tons of info, tons of live links, lots of straight talk about depression, suicide, meds, therapy, psychiatry, mental health trends, statistics, and more. And you know me, I call bullshit on bogus ideas (then give URLs to the actual data, so you can weigh the evidence for yourself). The idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything? Myth. Most people benefit from antidepressants? Myth. Antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials? Largely myth. (Half the trials show separation. Half don't.) Electroshock therapy is safe and effective? Bigtime myth. ECT is dangerous and consent forms are based on obsolete data. But don't take my word for it: Read the science for yourself. It's all laid out (with references) in the book. Download ePub or PDF now at NoiseTrade. Tell a friend.

☙ ❧ 
  I want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on Twitter. My advice? Follow these guys. They retweet!




Have you added your name to our mailing list?

Also please visit HackYourDepression.com when you have a chance, and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression.