Your smart watch will broadcast your sexual activity, so maybe take it off before going to bed? In the future, your insurance company will know when you’re having sex (fusion.net).

Terry Pratchett: Advice to Booksellers (thebookseller.com).

Terry Pratchett
When Exxon's Torrance refinery exploded in February, homes two miles away were blanketed with chemical ash containing lanthanum and cerium. The ExxonMobil Explosion That Nobody Is Talking About (ThinkProgress.org). 

"If it was true that lower taxes for the rich and more wealth for the wealthy led to job creation, today we would be drowning in jobs." The 1 percent are parasites: Debunking the lies about free enterprise, trickle-down, capitalism and celebrity entrepreneurs (Salon.com).

“Short-covering will continue to power the dollar higher,” says IMF economist Stephen Jen, who predicts a 9% advance in the next three months to 96 cents per Euro.

American Doctors Are Killing Themselves and No One Is Talking About It (thedailybeast.com).

Sen. Tom Cotton (R-AR) suggests war with Iran would be a breeze (ThinkProgress.org). Sadly, removing idiots like this from Congress is not such a breeze.

Seeing Everyone Else's Highlight Reels: How Facebook Usage is Linked to Depressive Symptoms (Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, Vol. 33, No. 8, 2014, pp. 701-731).

Why the 99 Percent Keeps Losing (CommonDreams.org).

U.S. now ranks 45th (of 107 nations) in electoral integrity, dropping from 26th place previously. Read the complete study for details.

Crappiest Clickbait News Fail of the Week Award this week goes to Mashable, for its landmark story In a perfect world, you'll be able to pick the toppings on your emoji pizza. And you thought journalism was dead!

 ☙ ❧

Tired of lies and half-truths about mental illness? Arm yourself with some facts. Check out my free book Mental Health Myths Debunked. Tons of info, tons of live links, lots of straight talk about depression, suicide, meds, therapy, psychiatry, mental health trends, statistics, and more. And you know me, I call bullshit on bogus ideas (then give URLs to the actual data, so you can weigh the evidence for yourself). The idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything? Myth. Most people benefit from antidepressants? Myth. Antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials? Largely myth. (Half the trials show separation. Half don't.) Electroshock therapy is safe and effective? Bigtime myth. ECT is dangerous and consent forms are based on obsolete data. But don't take my word for it: Read the science for yourself. It's all laid out (with references) in the book. Download ePub or PDF now at NoiseTrade. Tell a friend.

☙ ❧ 
  I want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on Twitter. My advice? Follow these guys. They retweet!



Have you added your name to our mailing list?

Also please visit HackYourDepression.com when you have a chance, and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression.