On New Year's Day, I posted "How I Fell in Love with a Schizophrenic," which was seen by over 60,000 people in 144 countries and garnered more than 450 comments, total, around the Web, at places like Reddit, Metafilter, Hacker News, Filtred Mind, and here on my own blog.

Sally's home from the hospital now. Like me, she was astounded at the popularity of my New Year's post. Because of the obvious interest in her story, I told Sally she should seriously consider writing a memoir. She agreed. And that's what she's spending her days doing now: writing the story of her descent into schizophrenia, and the struggle to come back into the real world. The working title of the book is Almost Normal.

We're currently looking for a literary agent. (If you know of any that might be interested, please point them our way.) Whether or not Sally's memoir is agented, we'll be looking for a publisher. And if we don't enlist the help of a New York (or other) publisher, we'll self-publish, obviously.

At the bottom of this page is a signup form. If you want to follow the progress of Sally's book, including our travails trying to find an agent and a publisher, enter your e-mail address in the form and you'll hear from us once or twice a month with updates. Your e-mail address will not be shared with anyone, nor will you be bombarded with newsletters.

Oh, and did I mention that if you sign up, you'll get the occasional chapter-in-progress that Sally's working on? Or that you'll get to see the query letter we intend to send to agents? And you'll get to see what the various responses of the various literary agencies are like? And what our "take" is on the whole process?

We'd love to have you join us on this ride through the twisting, turning path to publication. It's bound to be a lot of fun.

So please, let's stay in touch. We'd love to hear from you. Once you sign up, you'll get a thank-you note with our e-mail address, in case you want to write directly.

Thanks. Wish us luck.

Be well.