If you're a writer, no doubt you've accumulated some bookmarks, over the years, to articles that have proven inspirational to you. That's been the case with me. I thought today I might try to consolidate some of those links in one place, for easy access (not just for you but also for me). I found 115 article links that merit visiting, and revisiting.

Almost any writer, of any level of accomplishment, will find something useful in the following articles, some of which actually point to lists of additional articles.

Get ready for some terrific free reading.

115 Noteworthy Articles and Essays on Writing
A Definition of Author Platform by Jane Friedman
Advice for Authors by Seth Godin
Advice for Bloggers by Julie Powell
Advice for Writers by Sue Grafton
Advice on Writing by Po Bronson
Advice to New Writers by Marion Zimmer Bradley
Advice to Writers by Robert Benchley
Advice to Young Writers by Gary Henderson
The Art of Translation by Rick Kleffel
Beautiful Words by Grant Barrett
Belief and Technique for Modern Prose by J. Kerouac
The Best Books On Writing Books
The Best Writing Mistakes by John Reed
Billy Wilder’s Tips for Writers
Bukowski on Censorship
Calming the Inner Critic by Allegra Goodman
Can You Really Teach Writing? by Kurt Vonnegut
Concerning the Interview by Mark Twain
Confessions of a Book Reviewer by George Orwell
The Death of the Slush Pile by Katherine Rosman
8 Good Writing Practices by Neil Gaiman
Emerging Into the Light by Stephen Fry
Essentials of Spontaneous Prose by Jack Kerouac
Everything You Need to Know...by Stephen King
The Evolution of Blogging by Om Malik
Favorite Advice by Anna Elliott
Fear of Words by Nancy Friedman
Fenimore Cooper’s Literary Offenses by Mark Twain
Fifty Things a Writer Shouldn't Do
Fifty Things I've Learned About the Literary Life
Finding the Time to Write by Sahag Gureghian
Finishing Your Novel by Timothy Hallinan
Five Things to Avoid for a Pristine Query Letter
Five Tips About Writing with Rhythm by Mark Nichol
Formatting Scripts To Sell
Formula for a Query Letter
40 Twitter Hashtags for Writers
Freelance Magazine Writing by Laura Schaefer
Getting the Plot Right by Andrew Taylor
Ghost Writing by Barbara Feinman Todd
The Golden Rule of Writing by Eric Cummings
Great Characters Are Like Origami
How To Become A Writer by Mark Nichol
How to Read Your Way to Better Writing
How to Write a Great Novel by Alexandra Alter
How to Write a Great Work of Fiction by J. Egan
How to Write an Opening Sentence by Kas Thomas 
How to Write With Style by Kurt Vonnegut
How Not To Write A Story by Joe Konrath
How to Punctuate A Sentence by Michael Leddy
In Defense of the Adjective by Norman Corwin
Inspiration? by Annie Proulx
Irritating Phrases by Robert Fulford
Jane Friedman's Writing Advice Archive
Janet Fitch's 10 Rules for Writers
Kurt Vonnegut Explains Drama by Derek Sivers
Language Crimes: A Lesson in How Not to Write
Let Us Now Praise... the Cliché by James Parker
Life of Prose and Poetry by Marge Piercy
Line Editing in 10 Easy Steps by David L. Edelman
Metaphors We Live By by George Lakoff
No Really: Kill Your Cliches
No Such Thing as Writer's Block by Andy Ihnatko
Notes on Writing Weird Fiction by H.P. Lovecraft
O Muse! by Diane Ackerman
100 Best First Lines of Novels
101 Tips from the World’s Most Famous Authors
Phrases an Aspiring Writer Should Not Touch
On Writing by Terry McMillan
A Pseudonym Returns by Donald E. Westlake
Pupils Glimpse an Idea by Anne Bernays
Putting Pen to Paper by Mary Gordon
Reading by W.H. Auden
Redactor Agonistes by Daniel Menaker
7 Things Publishers Look for in Author Web Sites
7 Tips for Writing a Film Review by Mark Nichol
Shakespeare Was a Teenager Too by Al Martinez
The Shape of a Story by Ray Rhamey
The Simple Art of Murder by Raymond Chandler
Six Ways Twitter Can Make You A Better Writer
62 Writer's Digest Articles by Brian Klems
Some Basics on Magazine Writing by W. Terry Whalin
Starting With a Tree by William Saroyan
10 Obvious Truths About Fiction
10 Tips on Writing from David Ogilvy
10 Ways to Slim Down Obese Copy
There’s More to Publishing Than Meets the Screen
Time Lost and Found by Anne Lamott
The Teacher Who Encouraged Me 2 Write by D. Eggers
13 Tips For Actually Getting Some Writing Done
13 Writing Tips by Chuck Palahniuk
Together on Solitary Journeys by Hilma Wolitzer
Top 20 book reviewer cliches by Michelle Kerns
A Tribute to Harold Keables by Guy Kawasaki
12 Ways To Tell if Your Novel Is Dead
The Use of “I” in First Person Narration
What Book Publishers Really Want by Gary Smailes
What Every Writer Ought to Know about Fair Use
What Is Real Is Imagined By Colm Toibin
When Writers Speak by Arthur Krystal
Where Do You Get Your Ideas? by Neil Gaiman
Why Every Writer Should Keep a Journal
Why I Write by George Orwell
Why I Write by Joan Didion
Why (Some) Authors Fail  Why I Reject Queries (by a literary agent)
Why You Should Steal from Other Authors
Words That Think for Us by Edward Skidelsky
Write, Read, Rewrite by Susan Sontag
Writers in Hollywood by Raymond Chandler
Write Till You Drop by Annie Dillard
Writing by W.H. Auden
Writing Advice by Kristen Tsetsi
Writing Advice From History's Most Prolific Writers
Writing English as a Second Language by William Zinsser
If any of the links have gone dead, please let me know (by leaving a Comment below). If you found this list helpful, please do two things. First, bookmark this page. Secondly, share this post's URL with a friend. Thank you!