Could China be sitting on 10,000 tons of gold? (etfdailynews.com)

Zappos eliminates manager role, goes to flat structure; 14% of employees leave (businessinsider.com).

R.J. Hillhouse (who broke
the Hersh story years ago).
Seymour Hersh has taken a lot of flak for recent allegations about the bin Laden killing, such as his assertion that Pakistan's ISI was, in fact, keeping bin Laden in a safe house, yet that's exactly what was reported in December 2011 in the Terrorism Monitor Volume: 9 Issue: 47 (and earlier, in a blog by R.J. Hillhouse). And a prominent Pakistani journalist has now (allegedly) identified the walk-in spy who gave up bin Laden. So it's not impossible Hersh's version has a few things right. It would be good, in any case, to see a stronger response from the White House than "there's too many inaccuracies [in the Hersh account] to address one by one." Address them, please. One by one. Meanwhile, Hersh should man up and acknowledge that R.J. Hillhouse broke this story years before he did. (But oh, wait: Hersh doesn't know about blogs...)

Congratulations, Class of 2015: You’re the Most Indebted Ever (blogs.wsj.com).


Job Crapification: "Mid-wage and high-wage jobs accounted for 79% of jobs lost during the recession [but] as of August 2012, they represented only 42% of those created during the recovery. The gap was filled by low-wage jobs: only 21% of jobs lost during the recession were those making less than $13.83 an hour, but they make up the majority of new jobs created during the recovery." April jobs report promising but core problem is still income inequality (theguardian.com).

Internet Economics 101: Spotify unable to turn a profit despite revenues of $1 million per employee per year and no manufacturing expense. Spotify's net losses grow to $197 million (theregister.co..uk).

Almost 2 million Americans make less than $2 per day; 7.1 million children live in deep poverty (family income less than half the poverty threshold). Why So Many Americans Are Trapped in ‘Deep Poverty’ (thefiscaltimes.com).

Meanwhile, take out a $100 payday loan, owe $3600 (theguardian.com).

Not exactly news but still startling: The world's 80 richest people are worth more than the bottom 50% of humanity (globalresearch.ca). This is based on Forbes billionaire data, which omits dictators and monarchs. Hence it very likely understates, not overstates, the wealth of the wealthiest.

"There's a reason depression and its precarious cousin, anxiety, are the dominant political modes of late capitalism." An angry population is hard to govern; a depressed population is easy (newstatesman.com).

Join us each Friday for inappropriate news of the absurd. Bookmark this page and no one will get hurt.

 ☙ ❧

Tired of lies and half-truths about mental illness? Arm yourself with some facts. Check out my free book Mental Health Myths Debunked. Tons of info, tons of live links, lots of straight talk about depression, suicide, meds, therapy, psychiatry, mental health trends, statistics, and more. And you know me, I call bullshit on bogus ideas (then give URLs to the actual data, so you can weigh the evidence for yourself). The idea that antidepressants take weeks to do anything? Myth. Most people benefit from antidepressants? Myth. Antidepressants separate from placebo in clinical trials? Largely myth. (Half the trials show separation. Half don't.) Electroshock therapy is safe and effective? Bigtime myth. ECT is dangerous and consent forms are based on obsolete data. But don't take my word for it: Read the science for yourself. It's all laid out (with references) in the book. Download ePub or PDF now at NoiseTrade. Tell a friend.

☙ ❧ 
  I want to thank the following great folks who retweeted me yesterday on Twitter. My advice? Follow these guys. They retweet!



Have you added your name to our mailing list?

Also please visit HackYourDepression.com when you have a chance, and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression.