While I realize training, per se, is not relevant to the Germanwings crash, as a pilot I find it odd (to say the least) that Lufthansa would hire someone to copilot an Airbus on the basis of 630 hours of flight experience. I keep reading that Andreas Lubitz had 630 hours. Was that his total time at the time of the crash, or at the time of his hiring in 2013? Most airline pilots fly 50 hours a month or more. If Lubitz was on the job for over a year, he should have accumulated 600 flight hours just in the past year. If most of his 630 hours were obtained since his hiring, it means he was hired with very little flight time.

Lufthansa trains many of its pilots in Arizona, in Beech Bonanza aircraft (a high-performance single-engine, piston-powered airplane). I suspect many of Lubitz's hours were in this kind of aircraft. I doubt he had more than 300 hours of jet time.

As a side note: I have a couple hundred hours of PIC time in an ex-Lufthansa Bonanza that my father bought years ago. It's a great plane. It's no Airbus, though.

A Lufthansa Bonanza in Arizona.
And again, no amount of flight experience is relevant if you are intent on killing people. But I think it's fair to ask why Lufthansa (Germanwings) would hire someone with so little experience and entrust him with an Airbus full of people.

In the U.S., an Airline Transport Rating requires 1500 hours of flight time. With a fresh ATP license, most pilots are unable to find work at a major carrier. If they do, it's in a commuter-airline cockpit. Many fresh ATPs (in the U.S.) are overjoyed to find work with a cargo carrier. No one expects to get a "front office" job with a major airline with less than 2500 hours.

I guess they do things differently in Europe.

The Germanwings "accident" would have been much less likely 30 years ago for the simple reason that back then, most cockpits had three-person crews. Since that time, cockpit ergonomics have improved to the point where it is feasible (not to mention economical) to have a two-person crew. But now the question is: Do we want that, really?

Many questions will come out of the Germanwings disaster. Let's hope many good answers will follow.


 ☙ ❧ 

Have you checked out my free book Mental Health Myths Debunked? Tons of info, tons of live links, lots of straight talk about depression, meds, therapy, psychiatry, mental health trends, statistics, and more. And you know me, I call bullshit on bogus ideas (then give URLs to the actual data). You can download the book (ePub or PDF) at NoiseTrade. Do it now while it's free.

 ☙ ❧ 

Hey listen, the following list of people who retweeted me yesterday might not be 100% complete, but it's as good as I can do with my silly notifications-scraping hack. In any case, you should get busy following the folks shown below. They're fantastic Twitter networkers, and they retweet! (Click their pictures; the pics are live links.)



Have you added your name to our mailing list? What the heck are you waiting for, a personal invitation from @TheTweetOfGod? 

Also please visit HackYourDepression.com when you have a chance, and share that link with someone you know who might be suffering from anxiety or depression.  