What does a cognitive therapist do essentially? Bolster left hemisphere control in the patient by immersing him in ideas. In Primal Therapy, we work on the bottom end of the brain’s evolution, reducing the power of deep imprinted forces so that they no longer challenge the pre-frontal cortex to drive ideas. A number of studies have demonstrated the role of the pre-frontal cortex in repression (Anderson, et al., 2009; Depue, et al., 2007; Kikuchi, et al., 2009). One study (Anderson, et al., 2004) tested subjects who were asked to suppress unwanted memories and then had their brains scanned. The pre-frontal cortex dampened activity in the hippocampus of these subjects, thus interfering with memory retrieval. In brief, repression—gating—lessens access to oneself and one’s history.

Tranquilizers are indeed painkillers, and some tranquilizers can be given in higher doses to produce a surgical anesthesia. Here again we see an interchange between emotional and physical pain. For instance, when someone has a severely bad back and takes strong painkillers for months, and then continues to take them even after his back is healed, he’s considered addicted. But the same pill that calms his back pain also calms his history—his imprint—hence the continued need for the drug. The original "anti-psychotic" drug, Thorazine, was first used by a French surgeon who noticed that it made surgical patients indifferent or apathetic toward the pain they were undergoing. One author noted that scientific evidence supports a theory that most psychiatric drugs "work" by producing a kind of anesthesia of the mind, spirit, or feelings.

Work by R. Gaunt put rats under stress (tied to board), then gave them tranquilizers. They seemed indifferent to their problem. But their bodies weren’t. There were high readings in stress hormones. We need to keep this in mind when we take tranquilizers; for the wear and tear on the body goes on even if we are unaware of it.

Nearly all of us are prisoners of our prototype—our dominant mode of functioning. Cognitive therapy assumes we have an ample amount of free will. I am not so sure. We can make choices within the prototype, but it tends to offer a narrow range. What we are free to do is go back and find out how all that got started. That is what ultimately will widen our range of choices in life. It will free the parasympath to widen her vision and take more chances. It will allow the sympath to ease off the incessant struggle that never lets him relax. Finally, it puts our system back in balance so that our system can find an equilibrium so that we are no longer prisoners of medication after medication, drug after drug. A balanced system means the parasympathetic male’s chronically low level of testosterone is normalized—something we have found after one year of therapy. It means he is now more assertive and less depressed. A balanced system means not having to drink five cups of coffee a day or being hooked on Coke. It means not having to smoke, which ultimately will shorten our lives. It is the true meaning of being free.


Anderson, M.C., Ochsner, K.N., Kuhl, B., Cooper, J., Robertson, E., Gabrieli, S.W., Glover, G.H. and Gabrieli, J.D.E. (2004) Neural Systems Underlying the Suppression of Unwanted Memories. Science 303(5655):232-235.

Anderson, M.C. and Weaver, C. (2009) Inhibitory Control over Action and Memory. Encyclopedia of Neuroscience 5:153-163.

Depue, B.E., Curran, T. and Banich, M.T. (2007) Prefrontal Regions Orchestrate Suppression of Emotional Memories via a Two-Phase Process. Science 317(5835):215-219.

Kikuchi, H., Fujii, T., Abe, N., Suzuki, M., Takagi, M., Mugikura, S., Takahashi, S. and Mori, E. (2009) Memory Repression: Brain Mechanisms underlying Dissociative Amnesia. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22(3):602–613.