The depressive is, by and large, a parasympath — someone whose whole system is skewed to that part of the nervous system (the parasympathetic). This subsection of the nervous system is controlled by the hypothalamus. It is a system of rest, relaxation and repair, a system that usually produces undersecretions. It is the system that has evolved out of the "freeze" response in animals, which evolved over time to inhibit the ability to make an immediate and aggressive response to danger. There are times when the best defense is to do nothing or at least think and reflect a moment before reacting. One key marker for this is body temperature that is almost always universally low in these patients and is controlled by the parasympathetic nervous system. It speaks of a birth or pre-birth trauma that skewed the system into passivity, despair, defeat and an inability to react. It thereafter controls our behavior and our symptoms. Migraine, for example, is often part of this system’s response: a shutting down of (constricting) the vascular-blood circulation, followed by massive dilation.

If one ignores deep feelings, encased and remote imprints, then it is easy to overlook them in treating depression. One, then, has no choice but to offer prescriptions. One can only then attempt to push back the surging forces of pain, as repression of early pain leads to no other alternative. "Looking on the bright side" is a religious idea transported into the realm of psychotherapy. The "power of positive thinking" is best left to the church because, as much as we want to look on the bright side, our internal system is "looking" on the dark side. Why? Because the imprinted memory is dark and painful. However, it can be reached and extirpated. I have taken my patients as deep and as remote into their past as possible and I have never found a demon or dark, evil force. All I have ever seen is sequestered pain. All that is there is a pure need left over from infancy when those needs should have been fulfilled.