Who said that?  A great many booga booga aficionados plus someone else:  the former head of the National Institute of Mental Health.   How could that be?  Let me explain… and try not to interrupt.
First of all, what does that mean---brain disease? Does it mean that the brain is really diseased?   If so, where and how?  I mean is it a real affliction, a hit in the head, or a slow moving virus?  Is there any proof of that?  Not that I have seen.  Maybe we are looking through the wrong lens.  We are looking from outside and guessing what may lie inside; we are not sure so we give it a name—brain disease.  Does it really mean a disease?  If so where does it lie?

I have an idea; let’s look inside. How do we do that without serious surgery?  We look at humans and their lives and their brains.  It seems to me that is what is missing…..the human and his history.  I mean the brain does not live in a vacuum.   It lives in an environment; and maybe in that world lies answers to what we are looking for.  Would we ever search for answers to liver disease without seeing what its environment is?  Was it constantly bathed in alcohol?  Would not that help us find an answer? How about if we find that the brain is constantly bathed in pain with all of its concomitant nefarious effects?   And there was a chronically high cortisol level indicating enduring stress.  And maybe that is the disease---imprinted pain that never leaves.   And it is largely a pain that begins before we can say, “I am in pain?” So no wonder no one knows about that it

Well how come I am so smug and think I have all the answers?  Well for one thing I don’t think I have all of the answers; just some important ones.  I have lived that pain, something that freezes my mouth closed so that no ordinary act of will can force it open. And I have several thousand patients over almost fifty years who have gone through similar experiences; and then we have done double blind studies in England and France to measure our observations and our results; and when we perform double-blind research, we find major changes in many biologic parameters as discussed in scientific journals.  And then the patients report significant improvement in many of their former diseases. As just recently someone who had grand mal seizures for years and now no longer has them.  His whole life has turned around. We shall be filming him to see how and why that happened. We will see the actual disease and no longer concoct “brain disease” to explain the psychological mysteries.   They are not mysteries; they simply are unobserved realities and therefore not found.
They are now.
We have found a way to wind back the evolutionary clock and take a close look at our personal histories, and meanwhile, the history of the species.  It seems that the old truths that we can never go backwards in life is another myth.  We can and do travel backwards in time, and above all, can reverse what happened to us in those past times.  It is the essence of our work. It is now called “de-methylation”. There are so many research results that confirm our hypotheses.  And maybe we need to look into the effects of imprinted Primal pain and see what it does, and how it lies behind so many serious afflictions.   And then maybe others will pick up their therapeutic cudgels and look at what we are doing.  We have found a way to go deep into the brain in a natural way: evolution in reverse and see for ourselves what the truth is. Above all, we need to find ways to look deep in neuroscience.

I never started out with an a priori, an “idée fixe”, an idea of what I wanted to find in my research.   I started not from knowing what I want but only from “wanting to know,” and therefore had no stake in the results, which were often a surprise.  Now current research helps to confirm so much of our work and our theories.   I have confidence that we are on the right track, and that maybe others in the field should look into it.  We have spent nearly all of our profits in wanting to know more.  Why?  For the good of patients and their health, and also for the good of the profession and particularly science so that we do not use vague terms such as “brain science” which leads nowhere and helps no one.  Unless of course we really know what disease of the brain we are talking about. That disease, as it turns out, is so deep in the brain and brainstem as to be unbelievable; and therefore is ignored.   The one disease that is so monumental in its far-reaching consequences, is exactly what has been neglected.   They have apotheosized the neo-cortex and thereby have gone terribly wrong.  I want to shout, “It’s the brainstem!”  But it is also the limbic system; we need to look down, not up.

Warped thinking did not make the world go wrong; it is because of a devastating early life that became imprinted which then steered the cortex askew.   Our salvation lies in reorienting that cortex toward its normal functions; then there may be hope.  Think of it this way: we give medicine for a disease over and over, holding back the symptom.  And why “over and over?” Because we are treating the wrong disease.  So of course it is never a cure.
When we start to cure the right disease we no longer need medication over and over ad nauseam.  “Brain disease,” won’t do it.   A specific primal imprint at gestation and at birth will.  How do we know that? The imprint leaves a trace. For example, a mother overdoses on anesthetics during birth producing a baby who cannot breathe easily.   And who in reliving that trauma in therapy seems to be suffocating. You mean suffocating now?  Yes, because the trauma is an imprint that dogs us throughout life and will not let us go until it is addressed and relived.  We have had many cases where it was not relived with damaging results.  That imprint leaves a trace on the gene; it is measureable and we hope to see it reversible in our forthcoming research.

The trauma is an experience that must be lived, finally.  It must come to life and be experienced and resolved.   It then is no longer an extraneous force, but becomes organic and part of us.  The only reason we say “brain disease” is because we have no idea what lies in the antipodes of the brain; we are forced to guess and make a vague statement about what might be inside.
The real disease has so many ramifications that it seems like many diseases.  It affects brain function (hence brain disease), but also the immune system, where we have done research, as well as the circulatory\blood systems, and just about everywhere else.
The former chief mental health officer, Dr. Insel, is someone I do respect but he is at a loss, for the same reason so many other professionals are; they do not know what lies hidden inside.   Without Primal techniques I fail to see how anyone can really know.  It requires a descent into the cerebral underground, something that took us decades to figure out.   It is not a secret; it is open to all.  And indeed a Primal Legacy (90 videos) by Dr. France Janov,  is coming out within a few weeks that shows the process of Primal Therapy, and it shows professionals some of what must to done to help others.  It has been five years in the making.  We want no monopoly but we know how dangerous it can be to explore the deep brain without knowing exactly what you are doing.
We have seen over and over again the harm to patients who have done Rebirthing Therapy, skipping evolutionary steps, abutting up against very early and very forceful imprints for which the patient is not ready.  The result is a confused and jumbled mind.
Dr. Insel has more to say: (in August 22,  2015. New Scientist).  He believes that “schizophrenia and depression are brain diseases”. They are an outgrowth of physiologic changes. (See https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg22730353-000-psychiatry-is-reinventing-itself-thanks-to-advances-in-biology/) Yes, OK but what makes those changes?    Imprints lying low down that alter the biochemistry; when we relive them the “symptoms” diminish.   The cart is pulling the horse here.  Can’t get anywhere that way. Insel believes we need to fold psychotherapy into neurology to make things more precise.  He sort of denigrates psychology.  But neurology has not done much better in the field of emotions, which he assumes, should be thought of as disorders in brain circuitry.  Is there a human anywhere inside there?  He looks for markers in the brain but does he consider markers in the environment in which we start life, starting with parents and birth doctors?  He believes it is nearly always an underlying disorder of brain circuits. I guess that emotions are too vague and aleatory to be pinned down scientifically.   And the result of all this is now that psychiatrists are using neurology to merge Freudian analysis with it and help make it a science.  So let’s see; they want to take a 100 year old therapy with a missing validity, and construct neurology around it.  Will that make Freudian theory more scientific?  How?   Putting a dress on dung doesn’t not make it pretty or acceptable.  How about renewing our theories and aligning them with neurology?  Neurology cannot be the last word; human experience is. Neurology must try to align itself with human experience, and not maintain an exalted position.

Dr. Insel says that they have found depression to be one of several diseases.  I doubt that.  It has been one disease with many manifestations that make it seem like many diseases.   When we deal with the deep pain as the therapy goes on, we see how it spreads all over the system.   It can affect breathing and heart rate, yet it is still one disease. And those levels diminish as an ensemble with the reliving; finally making the pain organic.

Having said all this, neuroscience can be a great help and must be included in the scientific armamentarium.  We use it all of the time to confirm our findings, but it is not meant to englobe or take the place of other key functions such as emotions and feelings.
We can not suss out the cause of neurosis by profound observation of neurons.  Dr. Insel wants to build on neuroscience to help find answers but they will not be there.  They will be in our early lives and how the brain and nervous system was imprinted with those experiences. And how those imprints radically change the trajectory of our lives.

First, we need to know where to look in the patient; then, how to look: with an MRI? Then we need to know what we are seeing, and finally we need to know what it means.   Is a very low body temp in a depressive a good or bad sign?  Without a proper theory we will never know. And when the body temperature rises to “normal” levels is that a good sign?  We need to be fully armed with a theory and an experience behind it.  We need to stop guessing.