 I am reporting here on a hypothesis regarding cancer.  I have been wondering about the mechanism that causes an imprint of damage at the start of life, such as from anoxia, to climb the neuronal chain and produce widespread damage over the body.  I believe I have found a link: lowered oxygen when the system needs it most. This critical shortage of oxygen comes at a time when the first-line brainstem reigns, because higher levels of the brain have not yet fully developed, which is why the damage at this early level carries such deleterious effects later in life. The question is: Why does it endure and create such harm years later?  Through 50 years of clinical observation, we have seen our patients trace their lifelong suffering back to this kind of early damage done at the start of life. That damage can effect the nervous system, hormonal system, blood and circulation and muscle problems.  And we seem powerless to understand what is going on.  Maybe because the place and time of the damage is so removed from our present-day experience that we fail to link the cause and effect, so it becomes a mystery.

 We have observed and filmed apnea right after birth, and in some patients it seems like they are dying. They go easily 6o seconds without moving a muscle, nor breathing, or showing signs of life. They do not blink or show anything that means they are alive and present. They come out of it with a few coughs and throat clearings, with the subsequent newborn baby cry, which is unmistakable. But there is trauma here because there did not seem to be enough oxygen to aid the birth process. And there is the lasting imprint of a near-death experience.  This is the experience that lingers within the patient long after the event; and as they relive it in therapy, they know what it is and can describe what it’s all about. They uniformly describe approaching death, and that is precisely what is happening. This impending doom is the background that produces a lifelong fear of death, panic attacks, and anxiety fueled by a sense of approaching death. This often shows in their nightmares in childhood with someone or something trying to kill them.  This is the story the system coughs up to attach to near-death; to rationalize their experience even though they have no idea about how it starts or where it comes from.  They have childhood anxiety and are prone to ADD, as anxiety pervades the system not enabling them to focus or concentrate.  The imprint has left a massive amount of information that saturates the brain that the person must deal with all of the time.  That pain information blocks focus and concentration.  Remember, Pain is information.   It is systemic.  So as the pain rises higher in the brain, it registers the oncoming agony and concocts a story for a near death approaching.   It moves even higher up to fabricate a story of this death foretold.

As the child develops he begins a lifelong pattern of shallow breathing to conserve oxygen and energy,  a replica of the birth process where oxygen supplies diminished.  To accompany this is a passive life style, holding back and holding down. He does not project in his speech so he is often inaudible in communication.  Slower movements and equally slow reflexes.  Slow patterns of speech. The whole system remains in conservation mode to combat the imprinted damage which occurred originally.  This shallow breathing means that the system is not allowing in the oxygen it needs. And if we look at their brains and sleep behavior; chances are we would find more frequent apnea attacks.  Again, a reliving of the early trauma.  We are watching this closely in a patient who is currently undergoing sleep studies. My hypothesis is that there is an increase in sleep apnea event where a Primal patient is coming out of the oxygen-deficient birth and wakes up frequently and falls into a state where breathing comes in fits and starts, which I have observed. And it appears to be again a near-death experience where the person just does not seem reactive and aware. Patients report this as a near-death experience as they relive a traumatic birth. In the case of non-primal people, they just wake up, almost comatose as a replay of a birth on the cusp of death. The breathing seems not to be complete or at full capacity.  There is an oxygen deficiency that goes on and on where more sleep is needed to fill the tank, so to speak.  It is a repeat of history. It is here that we find those more susceptible to migraines as part of a lack of a full supply of oxygen, a memory arising from the early imprint.    Here we also see chronic low energy and tiredness.   I believe the apnea is one key sign of being close to that oxygen-deprived imprint that we see in so many patients.

 The shallow breathing in those with this condition, that will show up in sleep, is measurable.  And when patients relive the early lack of oxygen we should see changes in sleep patterns and apnea.  The reason I bring this up is I that I do see the shallow breathers struck by cancer.  And I wonder if the lack of sufficient oxygen is body-wide affecting so much of us.  It is a damaging imprint that leaves its traces and afflictions throughout the system.  The precursor for all this may be deprived oxygen at birth; too many pain killers taken by the mother or heavy anesthesia which is fine for a 130-pound mother but overwhelming for a 6 pound baby.  The distance between the time and place of the trauma and the symptom of cancer makes it incomprehensible.  Unless, we find a way to delve deep in the brain and observe for ourselves. Sleep studies, now so far advanced, can offer much information to us and eventually I hope to stop serious illness.

 The change we need to make is total personality. The trauma drives that personality and its tendency to disease.  There can be no piecemeal alteration.  We are changing patterns from birth; not easily or quickly done.  But necessary. Otherwise, each and every breath taken produces a deficit in the system and furthers the trauma. We are slowly depriving the system of needed nutrients and oxygen, the stuff of life.  The thought behind this is to propose a way of diverting the arc toward serious disease by changing the imprint of anoxia which binds the system ineluctably to deprive itself of oxygen and exacerbate the possibility of cancer.

       