Lest you think that only our brain remembers, it turns out that almost every part of us, every cell also remembers. And that memory stays alive for most or our lives.  That is exactly why we need a therapy not just for current symptoms of migraines or high blood pressure, but of something that affects every part of us.  That means those key imprinted memories that have detoured our lives, changed our destiny and our evolutionary trajectory.   We need a therapy that has a reach as long as the duration of some of those memories.  They have to be reached to impact and change them; that means a therapy that has a reach over most our lives, particularly our very early lives.

In comes Primal Therapy which attacks the central nervous system, the system that radiates its traumas everywhere in the brain/body.  That means we do not have to chase down every a small impact; simply go the center from where it all emanates.   That means that if the immune system is damaged while we are young or living in the womb, there may be a cancer lurking years ahead.  If we find ways to boost the immune system, a number of cancers seem to be reversed.  And the most recent work on serious diseases involves the immune system.  For many afflictions even later on, the primal, primary imprints are channeled to do harm where the system is weakest.   And they become weak and ineffectual when early trauma lowers the effectiveness of part of the immune system called natural killer cells.  Once affected they cannot do their job of attacking newly developed cancer cells.
Our therapy, as I have reported have doubled those cells in patients after one year of therapy.   And our primary focus is to attack the central mechanisms that spread its primal tentacles throughout the neurophysiology. It is simpler and more efficient.

Speaking of how all cells remember, a study put out by John Hopkins School of
Public Health, states that “blood taken from children up to the age of five, showed molecular evidence about whether their mothers smoked or not during pregnancy”. (Nov 23, 2015 ). That means that early traumas stay around and affect us.  It is not a benign memory; there are changes in the blood of the offspring.  They also suggest that many environmental factors are ‘remembered” and change us in the same way. That means serious toxins stay alive when the mother is herself affected while carrying.   The baby is constantly impacted by it.  And there is evidence that those babies impact by things like smoking in the mother have behavior problems later on.  And so when a doctor says  “anything troubling you that would affect your behavior”?   You are forced to say “no” because there is no way you can know until you visit the zone of the underground.

I related the story of a woman who had to move to the remote desert because she felt she was being poisoned in the city.  She was poisoned:  thirty years earlier when her carrying mother was chain smoking.  That memory, totally unconscious, still drove her behavior.   Her blood system remembered.  And if she had blood and circulatory diseases we would still not know its provenance.    “Do you smoke?”  “No”.  “We will have to do  a lot of tests to figure this out.”  Oh, thank you.

“Oh by the way, could you check out the imprint on the cells in my brainstem?”    Wha?????

There are levels of conscious awareness, and the blood remembers as well as any mental memory; only it does not speak English; it speaks biology,  a most valid and accurate language.  Your body as yet has no language to distort its meaning. So listen closely; the symptoms are speaking.

What the researchers are stating now is that these traumas can go back to pregnancy days and affect us for years.  You mean we are affected why back when?   Yes. And those experiences have an enduring and explosive impact?     Yes, don’t forget the toxins the mother produces on her own.  The baby is a prisoner in a locked-in cell with no exit; and he suffers and suffers.   He seems to be born depressed or anxious.  Probably not.   He was born neurotic (a life of imprinted pain) due to life experience.  Neurotic meaning, a load of pain not integrated, that disfigures the body and alters behavior over time.

The good part of this is that we can take a blood sample and spot where you have a trauma from womb-life,  and from mother’s smoking.  There is now a way to measure it so we do not have to ask key questions: a pin-prick and we know.  In the same way that exposure to lead can affect the body prenatally, we are beginning to see how early experience exposes us to different kinds of chemical imprints.  The body gathers up all the chemicals it is exposed to, registers it and is diverted from normalcy.  Yes we can be abnormal in the womb.   And maternal smoking can do it all by itself.  It is now a predictable event and should warn against the ingestion of any drugs during pregnancy.  Remember, blood contains minute molecular memory.  We can be fooled but not our blood.

So it isn’t that the blood remembers but it also stores the memory and affects us thereafter.  When there are serious blood diseases later in life, we should not neglect womb-life events.