 The BBC News published a paper on the work of the Institute of Cancer Research (BBC News, Health 8 April 2013. “Scientists Track Leukemia’s origins back to the womb, see http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-22062616”) What they say is what we have understood for years, the deleterious effects of trauma during womb life. They report that Leukemia is the most common cancer in children but I maintain it tells us much more about adult cancers, as well. The basis of all this is that something goes wrong in the womb while the mother is carrying. It can be external forces such as war or more personal events such as a husband who leaves home. It can also be because the mother drinks or smokes or is chronically anxious or depressed; the permutations are myriad. The result is often a change in genetic expression called epigenetics. The result of this, what I call “the imprint” is a deviation and ramification of many functions, from brain circuitry to vital organ function. And when we change the imprint we would expect to see changes throughout the system. This assumes we change the imprint. One of the ways we might do this is reverse the elements of the imprint such as methylation. Methylation helps in repressing expression, through enhancing repression. Bit by bit we should see changes in this as we go back and relive parts of the imprint on every level of conscious, all along the chain of pain. Reliving through connection to the source means undoing methylation, in my opinion. This is the goal of our future research.

 Now about the study: the researchers delved deeper into the disease process and through twin studies found that womb-life was a culprit. They studied the DNA inherited from both parents (having done a complete genome study), Leukemia, also known as acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), is a cancer of the white blood cells. There are faulty genes linked to the disease but epigenetics are key. They believe that the mutations accounting for it must have come from the womb. Other mutations may have come after birth. Here is the conclusion: “Studies like this could reveal new ways to target the roots of cancer; there is still more to do to make treatments better with fewer side-effects.”

 Now I must ask the question, “ How about finding out what happened in the womb that forced these mutations?” That seems to be overlooked as mission impossible. But it is not; we can find fairly closely what happened during womb-life to produce mutations. They are looking to alter those mutations by examining the mutation itself. I have written about how trauma reduces the efficacy of the tumor suppression function which has the job of stopping cancer growth; and I have also written about natural killer cells which are part of the immune system which look out for newly developing cancer cells and kill them. I have also noted that our therapy was studied independently and discover a significant rise in NK cells after one year of therapy. I will hypothesize that primal therapy can be a preventative of cancer if we have the time to go deep enough. I am not stating that in every case but we have little cancer among our patients and we believe that primal therapy can be a factor. In short, I think cancer originates deep in the brain often in womb-life and that is exactly what we treat.