My therapy is based on the dialectic; that means that you need to reach into the past to really live in the present.  You need to feel terror so that you can be rid of it. You need to feel fearful in order to get rid of it and become courageous.  Things turn into their opposite:  too much pain turns into no pain as overload and gating/repression set in.    Above all, you need to feel unloved in order to feel love.  Let me explain:

  As kids we were not held, caressed, appreciated; in short, loved.  That pain for a child is devastating so it is repressed and takes its place in our storehouse of unfulfilled need.  Now we cannot let much love in because repression blocks it; we can no longer feel anything fully.   We need to feel that unlove to the maximum. That opens the gates in and lets feeling in and out.   Then we can let love in.  No exhortation, encouragement, praise can do anything.  Above all, to be hugged in the present by group therapy members is less than useless.   It can only go so deep as the gates are slammed shut.

   That is why if we bring mama into the therapy room and she hugs her son for the hour nothing will change.  But if he cries and begs her in that child’s voice to love him and hold him everything changes. He is now free; been liberated from his history.  And we can measure all this precisely.  How much cortisol stress hormones are there?   Vital signs going up or down?   If the vital signs after a session do not go down to or below baseline, the beginning values, then there is no progress.  Ours is the first science of psychotherapy; the art of science.

   Dialectics is the interpenetration of opposites, first espoused by Hegel then by Karl Marx.  They never applied it to psychology but we now can.  It is a law we cannot abrogate.  We cannot overcome fear by getting on the horse again.  We just bury it. But it stays and will shorten our lives. 

   Better to fall off the horse, stay on your back and scream out the hurt and fear. Then you are brave.

I think this dialectical law applies to many different things. For example, when blood pressure is over normal, or even under, something is wrong in history.  If the body temp is far over normal there is something pathologic going on.  And again, we must turn to history for answers, not simply thrusting pills on the hapless victim hoping to normalize the readings.   We cannot normalize from outside.  It has to come from inside; from the events and times when the original deregulation took place that made things exceed normal.   That is why when we do biofeedback and try to normalize the brainwave readings we cannot succeed.   Here we are just forcing the issue; we need a “softer” approach that slowly evolves. 

Let me reiterate: anything we therapists do to normalize patients cannot succeed, because action/pressure from outside must be continued ad infinitum.  We must continue to give Prozac for a lifetime, or we add thyroid to the regime to normalize it.  That is an endless program.  But if we normalize from inside it can endure for a lifetime.  The original causes of the deviation have been addressed and done with.