How come Dr. Janov is not the most famous man on our planet?
It was a difficult decision to come to Santa Monica. So many disappointments concerning therapies before. Regressive therapy, family constellations, art therapy, coaching, One brain therapy... before trying Primal therapy I tried at least 20 different therapies.
Why is Primal therapy so powerful?
Because one man was lucky, focused and did not accept his inabilty to help those who need therapy. The result? A miracle: Primal therapy.
4 months into the therapy I do not see any dramatic improvements in my life, yet. What I see however is my gradual return to life. And what I am sure of is that it is the only effective therapy compared to other therapies which are only wasting time and money.
If Dr. Janov is not the most famous man on our planet, then we are living in a completely insane world, with psychotherapists so brainwashed they are unable to distinguish between effective therapy vs. ineffective therapy, with people celebrating their captors as their liberators and with evil being portrayed as good.  And with frustration and suffering being considered normal.
Dr. Janov cannot thus be recognized as a genius by official authorities.
Primal therapy gives life, strength and freedom and makes things what they really are: with Primal therapy good is good, suffering is suffering and life is life. Thanks to Dr. Janov. My infinite gratitude.
P. K., CZ Republic


Dear Art,


Congratulations on reaching your 90th year.
I’d like to thank you for your lifetime of dedication to helping others. Your influence on my life has been immense. Had you never written The Primal Scream, I’m sure my suffering would be far greater than it is today.
Today I can say that I have healed much of the pain from my childhood and complicated birth. I have a greater sense of freedom. I’m more present to my feelings and to life. My mother put it best: “it's as if you’ve had a lobotomy”! I genuinely feel like a changed man.
Of course there’s more pain in the bathtub and my spoon hasn’t gotten any bigger, but today I have a means to empty the bath, unlike the vast majority of the population. For that I will always be grateful to you and the many who have been influenced by you.
I hope you remain active as a writer for many years to come.  I think your writings have more influence than perhaps you imagine. Even the watered-down manifestations of the Primal vision that spring from your thinking are helping to slowly move the therapy movement in a more curative direction.

Much love

R. A., UK