The neocortex or top level of the brain deals with ideas and beliefs. Specifically, the left-brain deals with ideas and beliefs. The right side is more feeling oriented.
The left works in see-saw fashion with the feelings/limbic brain. As the lower right side of this brain becomes active the top-level intellectual brain gives way and accedes to the limbic area. In this way feelings come to the fore and make us aware of our emotions. We are able to feel. When the neocortex is hyperactive the limbic area cedes and we become enmeshed in ideas and beliefs. We feel much less. In other words, we can use language to narcotize our feelings and our pain. To feel, we must slow our thoughts and cede control to the right brain. When feelings come to the fore, we slow and become reflective and aware of our emotions. When our left-brain is overactive, we become enmeshed in ideas and beliefs and feel much less. If we are constantly in this state, we may be over-intellectual. In other words, we can use language to narcotize our feelings and our pain.
It is no accident that we use language in hypnosis to shut off feelings and to sometimes allow new surgery to take place. Here language is literally a painkiller, anesthetizing the feel of the knife as it penetrates the skin. We need to understand this thoroughly because in those therapies that use language as the preeminent tool it is basically anti-feeling. It allows patients to feel better because of this anti-pain, anti-feeling effect; shutting down our humanity. Once we know that there are basically three brains inside or cerebrum, there would be no way to ignore those lower brains that mediate or handle emotions, sensations and instincts.
When we have a painful experience the cortex registers the awareness of it, while the limbic area registers its feeling. Most current therapies rearrange awareness of feelings, not their physiologic experience. Thus we develop a new perspective on the same old feeling, not changing the pain one iota. We can rationalize our need without altering its force, and it is old unfulfilled need that makes us act-out symbolically. All this, then, can anesthetize experience and we walk through life semi-unconscious. One example: a patient is addicted to porno magazines where women look at a man’s penis with great joy. The feeling: a woman takes joy in the sight of a man. Translated, the young boy had a dour mother who never showed any emotion and was never happy to see her son whom she did not like. In symbols, pictures of women showing ecstasy, he found fulfillment of need. It is symbolic because obviously there was no fulfillment in his act. It was an imagined fulfillment. It is the basis of religion and belief systems, in religion we find a protector who watches out for us and loves us completely.
What is the basis of most cognitive and insight therapy? To supplant the patient’s ideas and perceptions with a different more “wholesome” one. The flood of ideas to drown feelings. That is why the Jungian and Freudian therapies have their adepts. For Freud there was the Id, that immutable force that drives us; while in Jung there are shadow forces that do the same. It seems like there are serious philosophic differences. But no, in the brain there are no differences; just more symbols. The brain does not distinguish between Freud and Jung; for its machinery it just needs and intellectual input to put down feelings and create pseudo happiness. And now we see one reason for the development of the new cortex: to shut off egregious pain. To distanciate oneself from another part of the self. To make life bearable. To dissociate and repress so that life can go on, which allows one to function. All we pay is the price of our humanity; and in most current therapies it is a steep price to pay. Those clear insights muddle our thoughts and internal perceptions. We lose sight of who we are. Thus, insight is to lose sight. Because it is the brain of the outer, externally-oriented sight (the “outside-the left prefrontal area) that we use to comprehend insights in therapy.