The brain doesn’t care what the content of a belief system is so long as it exists. It can be Zen, Allah, God or the Republican Party — the force is there to keep us hooked. Again, the brain doesn’t judge itself nor second-guess its content; it just produces the ideas that it needs — God is watching over me and will protect me. Does that mean all ideas are superficial and simply transposed feelings with little validity of their own? Not at all. But if we don’t understand that ideas are built out of a structure, from a lower level of the unconscious, we shall never learn how to combat or change them. To remain in the realm of ideas alone is to lie in the domain of philosophy. Ideas that are in accord with one’s feelings — the environment is being polluted — is not what I shall be discussing because then we would have to analyze the validity of the idea: Are hot-house gases increasing, for example? Indeed, we recently treated a woman at the Primal Center obsessed with pollution; she would throw fits if someone smoked near her, a seemingly logical response, but it came out of a feeling that I would never dare to interpret on my own — there were toxic drugs given to her mother at birth, and also the mother smoked and drank during her pregnancy. The newborn sensed that her world was "polluted". This remained unconscious until she relived her birth and felt all the toxins surrounding her. She knew immediately the cause of her overreaction in the present. That understanding, however, did not invalidate her beliefs. Again I do not want to validate or invalidate anyone’s beliefs; I simply want to show how they help us cope in the world. As I pointed out, the brain doesn't care about what idea we have so long as we have them, and that the idea brings relief — hope against hopelessness, courage against fear, life against death, having someone there who listens to us instead of feeling totally alone in an indifferent universe. When we feel hopeless — when we have lost our best friend and life seems so dreary — we can appeal to an idea of someone or something that will help out. The idea may even keep us from killing ourselves. We can imagine a help and a love from a deity that never existed in our early lives; that imagination will work for the brain. Neurons (brain cells) do not distinguish between a good idea, a real idea and a false one. With pain, nerve cells go to work immediately calming it; they manufacture painkilling chemicals such as serotonin, and allow the force of the pain to be diverted into higher left-brain areas that are in charge of beliefs. It is an automatic process commanded by and servile to one’s painful feelings. Serotonin is what Prozac, Paxil and Zoloft manage to preserve in adequate quantities to keep pain away. Either we take 10 milligrams of Prozac or we take 100 milligrams of a very strong and persuasive idea — both have the same effect. Both gate pain in the brain and keep it barricaded in the unconscious. One is injected from the outside and the other is injected from the inside.