There was a piece this summer from BBC News and other scientific sources about a  new therapy to help in the fight against cancer. (http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-18874083).
It has to do with part of the immune system known as Natural Killer Cells  (NK cells).  These cells I have written about for years because they seem like advanced leaders looking out for the appearance of newly forming cancer cells;  hurrying over to attack them, destroy and devour them.  They are very important.  And what is even more important is that we have found a  way to increase their presence and their fighting force. Thus, we may have found a way to help in the fight against cancer.  I say "MAY" because these are always complex issues that we don't want to oversimplify.

  But let's look at the evidence.  The new therapy goes under the name of immunotherapy, and the theory is direct and simple: there isn't enough NK cells in the cancer patients to fight off the disease.  So the scientists decided to infuse additional NK cells into the patient's system.  Initial reports seem favorable.  It seems as though our bodies produce adequate amounts of killer cells to combat ordinary assaults, but somehow  some of us do not manufacture enough.
I will offer my perspective which is that very early in our lives, especially womb life, there are traumas that overtax our immune capacity; in fact there is not enough to combat that specific challenge  for that specific trauma. The trauma during womb-life may alter the set-points for NK cell production for a lifetime.  This is particularly so  when the immune system is forming and the set-points for immune function are established for a lifetime.  We do know that this is true for many hormones such as cortisol.  In a sense, the immune system has been compromised and remains defective and insufficient to do its job.  Thus, it may be that as new cancer cells are first forming, there is not enough warriors to fight off the carcinogen.  Malignancies will remain uncontrolled.  So it would make sense to add to the mix something that enhances NK production.

  There may be another way to accomplish this.  We did a double blind study of NK cells at St. Bartholomew's Hospital in London some three decades ago.  We found enhanced production of NK cells after one year of our therapy.  It was a significant change and it allows us to consider that what we do is buildup a anticancer force in our patients.

  So here is the question:  what is it about our therapy that changes NK cells in patients?  I believe that when patients go back to womb-life (explained in my Life Before Birth), they enter into the epoch of  development when many hormones were beginning their evolution.  It is again a chance to go back and undo and redo history, as strange as that may sound.    In reliving that time  we are able to normalize distorted and dislocated function.  We can, in short, change history.  And in this sense we produce NK cells that are prolific and strong enough to do the job they were intended to do.  We "right" the system and make it stronger.
It is why, in my opinion,  mentally healthy people should suffer a lot less cancer.  There are many contributing factors here, not the least of which is the reduction  of stress hormone levels at the same time.  What we do in our therapy is therefore reduce the strength of foreign intruders while building up the standing army. We go to the source of the problem: how the system was compromised at the beginning.  The memory of that traumatic event forced a permanent dislocation of functions.  The imprinted trauma  keeps the dislocation  alive as if the danger was always there and imminent.  Therefore the system is reacting, perhaps, to a mother who is and was chronically anxious and stressed.  It seems as if the system "used up" its supplies of NK cells.  And the set-points were set lower than they should have been.  This is no different from the case of serotonin.  We manufacture our own but early on, traumas can compromise its production so we manufacture less.  And the set points are changed to lesser levels, as well.  When our patients relive very early experiences their serotonin production normalizes, as well.