When I was in analysis; oh yes I did that.  I was a wreck after the war and yet all we did was analyze my dreams.  And then later someone in my field asked me why don’t I do what he does and talk to himself, reassure himself and look on the positive side?   Ok fine but what if whom I speak to is not there?    Or even more, what if the brain speaking now is not at all the same brain that underwent stress before, during and after birth?  And what if that deep brain that processes emotions is buried under loads of repression and pain?   You see, they are the not the same brains.
The brain that hurts from very early life is not the same one who think, reasons and believes today?   They cannot speak to each other and cannot influence each other except through intermediaries.  Through other brain structures.    Especially true when repression has blocked exit and access and left no openings to feelings.

That is why we cannot reason away addiction.   Where addiction lives there is no reason!   Reason can change other ideas but never deep imprints which has a home way down deep in the brain.   It not only does not know about reason but cannot listen and understand what is says, ever.    The top level has only a tenuous relationship to the lower depths.  So counseling for deeply originated trauma talks to deaf ears.  It is the brain of powerful agony and misery.  It wants one thing:  surcease.  Relief.  And now we know that the only relief is not to leave it alone with its agony.  It awaits a lifetime to be experienced and resolved.   It cannot be ignored; for when it is, addiction and suicide may follow.

And when it is relived, bit by bit, it has to include all of its origins, the pain and the context.  All that was part of the original reaction must be experienced again including the part that could not be experienced so early because of the terrible pain.  I assume that any other therapy is helping repression and continued disconnection; it focuses on a brain that has no communication to deeper levels.    Therefore, those deeper levels are impervious to language.   Can you talk English to a shark?  How about French to a dinosaur?   See my point?  We need a modicum of neurology to know that the brainstem does not speak any language and cannot respond to it. It is only if we think the problem is language deep that we can believe that words and insights will change things.

If we want to cure anxiety and stress we need to go too their home office;  take the down neuronal elevator to the lower floor and press the code … primal.