This is a “Happy Birthday” letter from a series of letters sent to Art by patients, former patients, friends and readers from all over the world that show how Primal Therapy have impacted their lives.

To Dear Art,

HAPPY 90th BIRTHDAY for the 21st of August.
I hope you had a lovely day.

You are a really wonderful man and you and your therapy have really helped me.
I thank you so much for that. Primal is one of a kind, in a league of it's own.

I really think you should be awarded the Nobel Peace prize for your services towards
humanity. I hope that one day you are. You deserve it.

Anyway, once again, all the best for your special day and this milestone in your life.

Kind Regards,

S. B. Australia


Art:   Wow! just reading your birthday article was so moving and I cried.   At first I thought I was crying for you, then quickly realized I was crying for me.    Crying, that I do on a regular basis about the many sad things in my life, both past and present ... but now I know I am in the feeling zone of life.    What a joy and comfort for the most part.    So I too am so, so, so grateful for what you discovered and gave to the rest of the world ... if only they could listen or, were able to read ... really read ... and know and feel so deeply.

It's all so simple ... unbelievably simple ... and yet so elusive to so many.   I was however disturbed by the pig squeals and I wish I had not had to read that, as I am now hearing pig squeals, though I never heard the amount you did.   

Meantime I do have someone that really loves me ... not the same way I love him ... but then that's always how it is.   BUT it is enough ... and like you say ... if only, just only,  my father had known how to love ... my mother for the most part did; since she loved my father dearly and on becoming pregnant with me, her first born ... she loved the baby inside her (me) that was her husband's baby.   I got something.

So why did I, reading "The Primal Scream" want this therapy?   I knew I wanted to live in the feeling zone of life ... that I got, to a some extent, from my mother.   So! thanks also for the article and learning more about you and your life, than I'd ever known before.    Your integrity has always astounded me.

Good luck Art.

J.W.