I have written about resonance before; how an input today can reawaken inputs years ago, eventually traveling all the way down to basic origins, all along the resonance chain that follows evolution. It may be what happens in cancer since I believe that resonance is a biologic law and not a one-off event.

So what happens when there is a trauma or severe intrusion while we live in the womb? Where does resonance travel? The same route of resonance, only this time a trauma forces the resonance back in phylogenetic time.  Thus trauma in the womb, a smoking mother, forces the resonance back to ancient times to where primitive reactions are activated and that could mean cancer. From this standpoint, cancer is an evolutionary disease. It moves with evolution and follows its rules and laws, including resonance. Once this resonance has triggered off phylogeny, cancer would be the logical result. What is happening is that the switching mechanisms for genes are tampered with when there is trauma and there is a loss of natural evolutionary order to their development. Certain genes get out of control. They no longer recognize boundaries and run wild. Natural genome sequencing has been interrupted. Then we are left with what to do about it; how de we treat it? I think in the same evolutionary way; going back in ontogenetic time to where the disruption and imprint took place and address and attack it as the enemy. That is the enemy, at long last, not necessarily the cancer itself.

We can treat the presumptive enemy and leave its imprinted dangers untouched. That only presumes that it will return again and again.

We need to push back our timetable until we reach our ancient brain and its deep molecular processes. Cancer may not appear early on but its organizing processes can. The stage can be set so early that we remain unaware of it.
Cancer has been called, The Emperor of all maladies, and it is clear as to why. When we are just formed so are the cancer cells. We evolve together and require an evolutionary approach, slowing the evolution of its cells.

Why should cancer be exempt from evolution? If it is not, then evolution must be taken into account in its treatment. Why is there always a danger of recidivism? Because the generating sources of it are not addressed. To do that, first, we need to study early trauma in the womb and at birth to see if there is a high correlation of adversity in the womb and later cancer, which is the study we plan to do. Cures have been elusive up to now because we have not seen the effects of very early life in the origin of disease. We will try to correct that omission.