I would like to tell you a soothing bedtime story but all I have is bad stories. Today in the news is the story of neuroscientists Nora Volkow. She is in charge of studying and treating drug addiction, head of the national institute on drug abuse. God help us because she won’t. She has decided that addiction has all to do with less or more dopamine. She is studying dopamine pathways, etc. She says, “addiction is all about dopamine.” And headaches are all about aspirins. Or, “headaches are all about serotonin.” You fill in the chemical blanks.

You know why they think that? Because they are scientists, in the strict sense of the word. They see chemicals, cells, hormones but never never the human being. Why is dopamine depleted? What happens to us to make that happen? They don’t seem to believe in the unconscious or very early imprints; they don’t believe in early reality so they look at cells and chemicals. Reminds me of the big painting of the nude and the little lady in the Victorian dress is looking only at the flowers in the background. Now I know why she never answered my letters, or why the previous director told me that I had to go through a friend of his. It is not just politics; it is unconsciousness on the part of the scientists who studied in order to avoid their pain and their feelings, and now cannot see how on earth our early life could lead to addiction. It makes me heartsick to think that addicts everywhere are waiting for help and what they will get is more or less of dopamine. (NY Times, June 14, 2011, Science Times). And people who might help are ignored.

This is not sour apples, not pouting; but what it is, is heartsick, knowing that addicts will never get the help they need. And they will suffer and go to jail while scientists study less and less and learn less and less. I guess the whole human being is too complex to grasp and understand, especially by those who have no access to feelings and who do not see how feelings are paramount in the problem. It is not a disease. It is survival. Trying to be normal by taking the drugs to normalize the system that was detoured by early pain. By taking powerful painkillers to counter powerful pain set down even during gestation.

I have treated so many addicts from glue-sniffers to eating disorders to heroin takers. They are trying to beat the pain. Why can’t the scientists see that pain? They could if they could see their own; but alas, they cannot. A caveat: you need in-house therapy for heavy-duty addicts, but they can be treated if they are watched for months until the pain subsides; that is not done overnight. Do you think anyone puts powerful drugs into their system if they didn’t need it; out of caprice?

Years ago I had back surgery, painful affair. And the State decided not to allow us in the hospital to have powerful painkillers because they were so worried about addiction. Can you imagine? Doctors who cannot feel their pain deciding that others have to. So the repressed win and they take a detour in studying addiction that will NEVER lead to cure. And they get all the money for their studies because it can be quantified; so much dopamine, so much this or that. Where are the feelings? Where are the humans? Where is there attention to their early lives? Where is the acknowledgement of history? Volkow may know about pain but can she feel it?