If you have trouble in your emotional life you need to examine your life before birth. When the whole system is gearing up for life on the planet, gestational life has already constructed a crucible for life outside the womb. Life in the womb is perhaps the most important time of our lives; so much of adult symptoms and behavior can be traced to that epoch.

I have written about the prototype, the “Now print” that is engraved in the neurophysiologic system even before birth. Any severe trauma while the mother is carrying can be imprinted into the baby's system where it may well remain for the rest of his life. Here it may change the brain circuits and cause a permanent deviation in the function of organ systems. There is much less possibility of that after birth. It is “now print” because it is setting down a prototype of heuristic value that will direct behavior thereafter. It is memory of survival, of what worked before to save our lives. And it worked when the input stimulus may have been a life-and-death matter as so many traumas during womb-life are. This will happen despite the fact that there is no functioning neo-cortex to remember the scene; it happens below the level of conscious/awareness, which is why we cannot get there through the vehicle of language. Here we have a learning system that is distinct from the verbal learning/memory system that we will develop later. It is neurophysiologic memory.

Now what does the prototype do? It folds all that surrounds a feeling/memory and distills it into a general principle. When confronted with an obstacle, for example, it is best to retreat, not meet it head on (the choice of the parasympath, passive individual where passivity was life saving in the womb). The principle is not struggling for air when the mother is anesthetized at birth, but retreating into less use of energy and oxygen—passivity. To undo that imprint, not so easily done, we need to return to the brain that registered it and relive it. If someone says that the patient must then be offered a new ending for what he relived, we understand immediately that we have enlisted the aid of the adult brain and undercut what the patient has felt during the session.

We know that in reliving gestational life or the birth trauma we are succumbing to deep and long, slow-wave, brain signatures which denotes life before birth. To then appeal to the late developing new-comer, the neo-cortex, to finish off the sequence and add a good ending confounds the work of the deep unconscious. Essentially it takes the patient out of the deep brain imprint and places her back to the neocortex. The same can be said for early childhood pain where the brain that should be employed, the right feeling side, is abdicated for the left brain explanatory, understanding one. In short, we continue to talk to the wrong brain.

A patient with a very rapid, left frontal cortical signature cannot be feeling until we bring her into the feeling zone. The frontal thinking apparatus must recede for a time. And again, language only plays a secondary role. One way we do that is offer tranquilizers to the patient for a short period of time to push down some inordinate pain from gestation or birth. The overload of pain and all levels prevents one from integrating feeling by feeling. We must remember that in dealing with very early life we are mostly describing the work of the right brain. The left brain focus will not get us there. Yet after a year of therapy it will help to also use the left brain for understanding so that each side is more in equilibrium with the other—a more harmonious brain.

To offer patients an understanding of his motivation by the therapist or to propose a different ending of the pain by a therapist means an appeal to the wrong brain. It negates the whole notion of the critical window, where there is a time to fulfill need and only that time. So to utilize the more advanced, later evolved brain cannot allow for integration. The only way to resolve the earlier trauma is put yourself back there (or to be lead there by a therapist) neuro-physiologically and resolve on that level.

Integration means that reliving memory will affect nearly every system in our lives. So we measure natural killer cells, serotonin and brainwave function to test whether there has been integration; and we have found profound changes in all of those over time in our therapy. So we ask, “does it matter if we don’t relive events during womb life? Yes, because that reliving can produce a change in many physiologic parameters and in behavior. So the answer is clear. Yes, it matters because we have seen engraved patterns (migraine, high blood pressure, impulsive acting-out)from early childhood on that get resolved and integrated decades later in therapy. If patients needed to do more than relive, then they would feel worse, not better, months and years after therapy. And their physiologic changes would not hold up.(The stress hormone, cortisol, would again diminish to pre-therapy times). I think the only time we can rewire deviated set-points is when the brain retreats to an earlier prenatal time and deals directly with the original causes of deviation.

To imagine that some kind of explanation by the therapist to what a patient has relived will help, is to forget about the critical window, as I have mentioned. We have to be on that level to integrate; it cannot be done from “above.”(the neocortex). It cannot be the adult watchng the child go through it all. It must go from the bottom to the top in the order of evolution. In so doing we are back in the trauma, completely, feeling each component of the event and putting it back together in a new way. Here is cohesion and resolution.