Here is a current patient retelling his overall changes and alterations in biochemical functions. It is not enough to relate numbers but also changes that accompany those changes. Changes can be exaggerated to please the doctor so we need corroboration, and external measures as well. 

We have studied vital signs changes, especially body temperature which is a measure of the continuing work of the body. Lower temperature that endures means far less work of the whole system. That can mean enhanced longevity according to some related studies.

When all signs drop together, we have a system change, very important. Vital signs are just that: signs of the vitality of the system.

When we pair his life changes with objective measures, we are confident of his improvement. He is enjoying his life. Isn't that the goal of what we do? No pain but joy. Unfortunately, we must go through pain to get to joy: the dialectic.

All those signs combined augur well for increased longevity.




Here is the patient's interpretation, in his own words.

I spent a bit of time extracting my Skype history to create some charts of my vitals from June 2013 to the present time.

My main conclusions:

- My blood pressure has dropped relative the age average
- My pulse has dropped relative to the age average
- My temperature has been constant and below the age average

At least for BP and pulse, my case appears consistent with others that Art has mentioned where vital signs get 'healthier' over time with therapy.

I have also been intermittently taking Dr Ingeborg Bosch's Personal Defense Profile Test as an indicator of neurosis, albeit self-reported of course. I've plotted my scores on this vs my investment in therapy. My defenses have also trended downwards with increasing investment in therapy.

All in all, this concurs with how I feel these days: more centered, less compulsive, more mature, more masculine.

Thank you all once again for your contribution to my transformation. Long may it continue!

It's been an extraordinary transformation - beyond anything I could have imagined in my first interview  in December 2009.

My sexuality has changed fundamentally, my relationships with women have completely transformed. I have a very different personality.

The vital signs do tell a story, but it's really about the emergence of a different human being. It's as if a new version of me has  arisen and taken over the body of the "old XXXXX".

I've gone from being sick, confused and under-confident, to someone striding out through the world, loving who they're being. Well most of the time! What a ride Art. What a ride.