Years ago my team and I watched something we had never seen before. Someone reliving something that looked like a birth primal and yet quite different. We let him go through it for about a half hour and then asked him what it was. He wasn’t sure. We then found that he’d had ten shock therapies in England for depression. He was reliving the shock, in the same way that another patient, also from England, was reliving her shock therapy (which we filmed). It looked to me like shock therapy and when I put a pencil between her teeth, her back arched and she went into what looked like an epileptic seizure. She knew when she came out of it what it was. It seems clear to me that what goes in has to come out; it is a shock just like any other shock we go through in our lives. It overwhelms the system and shuts down large parts of it. Patients need to relive electroshock therapy without a specific event in the same way as reliving the shock of seeing their parents die in a car crash. The system is overwhelmed in both cases. Part of memory is shutdown in both situations. The doctors find shock therapy helpful since it hides away past memory, keeps the person unconscious; but, as I have said before, “You cannot get well unconsciously.” It’s no different than hypnosis.

The authors of a recent study on shock therapy noted that over 10-20% of depressed persons unaffected by psychotherapy go on to shock therapy. This also seems to be true for tranquilizers, which often cannot touch depression. The doctors conclude that the only option left is to blast the patient’s brain with electrical energy. And again, there is no asking “why?” Why is depression there in the first place? Or even, what is depression anyhow? There is no thought that perhaps we need a therapy that goes deep enough to effect deep, suicidal depression.

The template here seems to be that a first-line imprint from gestation or birth leaves the prototype of hopelessness (or terror or rage, etc.), impressed into the system. Until that original imprint is addressed and relived there will always be a tendency to deep depression. Yes, it will help to discuss one’s feelings with another person, a therapist, but that still leaves the template intact. Still, talking it out eases the load a bit, even temporarily, and is a good thing.

It is not that depression is refractory to psychotherapy. It is that psychotherapy is refractory to depression. It is that current psychotherapy is too superficial to change anything profoundly. It is the fault of the therapy, not the patient. Once we know what it is and have the proper tools it is no longer untreatable. Cognitive therapy only worsens matters by remaining in the realm of cognition instead of feelings. Thinking “positive thoughts” will never change the feelings that are at the heart of depression. It isn’t that depression cannot be touched by therapy because it is such a serious affliction; it is that conventional therapy is not designed to probe the depths of the unconscious where generating sources lie. And today it seems that the only way conventional shrinks can get to those deep-lying imprints is through jolts of electricity.

Doesn’t it seem bizarre that when we are at a loss we start to blast the brain with electricity? But the shock doctors, they don’t see it as a loss. Of course there is memory loss in shock therapy; it is meant to happen. We are programmed to forget. In a way, our therapy is shock therapy in reverse. In reliving we are feeling shocked again but we can integrate that shock and so be done with it. We become superconscious, hyperaware of what went on. We don’t blast away the imprint; we approach it and finally welcome it. We don’t make it an alien force; we make it become part of us. Until that happens we must take measures to put down the force—pills, shots, shocks, endless discussion, cheerleading, jogging and exhortations to get going. And in cognitive therapy, the advice by doctors, “You see there is no reason for you to be depressed; your kids are healthy, your wife loves you…blah blah blah.”

The force is that ancient engraved imprint. The doctor is sitting behind his desk and cannot see an event that is forty years in the past. He therefore can draw no other conclusion: he (the patient) needs to get over it. For the cognition/technician it is all in the present, and seems to be irrational. They try to make it all rational without noting that the symptom has antecedents far back in history. And for such antecedents there are consequences—depression. It is all a logical extension, reacting to something specific in the past; once we get to the past it becomes eminently rational. To be bereft of the past makes it all seem irrational. We cannot make sense of any of this without referring to history. It is not just some bad thing we must blast away but specific feelings that need to be felt.

What is being blasted away? Often it is hopelessness and helplessness, the bedrock of most suicidal depressions. Those feelings are trying to make it up to the top for release, but alas, pills and then shock therapy keep it down. So the one thing that can cure is seen as the enemy, something to be avoided. What a strange paradox!

In shock, as in both that form of therapy and life, there is a fundamental disconnection from feeling centers to the top level comprehension areas of the brain (see Perrina, et al., 2012). A sort of functional lobotomy. The brain is saying, “I can’t take any more input so I will just shut down.” And with that shutdown come hidden forces that constantly render the person uncomfortable, like he is carrying a heavy load that he cannot get rid of (which he is—of feelings). His movements therefore are slow and labored; he has trouble breathing; it all seems like such an effort. There is no energy left to do anything in life, even eat. Repression is at an extreme,  and it weighs the whole system down. All energy is being used in the service of gating/repression.

The current rationale for depression seems to be that it comes out of nowhere (some textbooks state it thusly—“endogenous depression”), like some phantom to haunt us. And if we do not understand the imprint we are forced to call in the phantoms. We need to know that suicidal depression is something knowable and genuinely treatable. We don’t need to insert something like a shock machine into someone. All we are doing there is ensuring that would-be liberating memories are more hidden and inaccessible. There are treatments that are much easier, safer, and quicker; and a way to truly get rid of depression.

Perrina, J.S., Merzb, S., Bennetta, D.M., Curriea, J., Steelec, D.J., Reida, I.C., and Schwarzbauerb, C. (2012) Electroconvulsive therapy reduces frontal cortical connectivity in severe depressive disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 109(14):5464–5468