  Now that we have emptied out the hospitals what can we do about the cops?  I have an idea: reduce them because there will be so little need for them.  Yes there will be violent crime committed by those who had bad gestational life and birth trauma; far less by those who had a decent, warm and tender childhood.  There will be far less  losing control because most of us will have a full set of marbles; that is, a more integrated, competent neocortex that can inhibit dangerous impulses and steer us into healthy lives.  With a proper connection from feelings to top level control most of us will be able to control our feelings, our angry and terror.  Actually, there will be far, far less terror and rage as the very early traumas that engender them are gone.  And by the way, there will rarely be a migraine or high blood pressure because those early generating sources are no longer there.

    Why do we need police?  Traffic?  With far less drinking and drug taking we won’t have them investigate all those accidents, taking reports and draining insurance company coffers and our wallets.   What can police do?   Investigate fraud by psychopaths; some will exist, and look into faulty manufacturing of cars and other things because there might still be residual psychopaths running companies.  After all, companies are not known for their great conscience.   They will rarely need to look into rape and sexual offenses because we will all have better control of our feelings. With all of the savings from police salaries we can spend far more on education and schooling.   We will soon have a highly educated populace.  And the lawyers?  So little need for them…..yes for business documents but even there someone’s word will be her bond.  To make sure about ownership of property, yes, we might need a lawyer. But all that litigation will be a thing of the past; less of us trying to screw someone in a business deal; truth will be the final arbiter.

   And oh yes, we will know who can be  trusted, not acting out our need to trust in following others blindly.    Not trying to win at any cost;  no stake in beating or getting ahead of someone.  No need to cheat in order to win over someone else.   No neurotic needs, in short, that detour us and drive us relentlessly.  No need to keep going and be unable to relax.  With full feeling comes full sexuality and makes marriages and relationships better.  And when personal needs becomes acknowledged we care for those who are needy and try to help.  We vote for those who understand need and want to do something about it.   Society will be geared around need; primary need and not manufactured ones such fame and riches.  We will really be our brother’s keeper.

  We won’t impoverish our country with constant buildup of arms.   We will not feel so unsafe that we need more and more guns in order to feel safe and protected.   Being stable and secure we will not have to manufacture enemies to combat.  We will not have to project our inner demons into outside evil forces who want to hurt us.   We can tell the difference between our inner feelings and outside reality.  And we won’t have to project our feelings onto new relationships so that this woman or man won’t just be wonderful but will be seen realistically.  Remember we project our unfulfilled needs onto others at first because need dominates.   And then with more experience we begin to see reality. That is the start of divorce and the start of lifelong suffering in the children.  All that can be avoided.  Obviously, not everyone’s perceptions will be perfect but they will be much better.   We won’t look for salvation because we no longer look for a savior.    We can save ourselves.   I will leave it to you to see about religion; but John Lennon said it:  the dream is over…..I don’t believe in…...

    All this is not in the realm of improbable or impossible.  We have the means to do it all NOW.   But first, a small detail.  We need to produce feeling human beings who have enough of themselves not to be taken in.  After that, the rest is easy.  When we know our insides as well as the outside we will have a good idea what is wrong with us and why.  A stomach ache will be understood without doctoring.   And what a relief—our vital signs will be normal so that we won’t have to rush to doctors.  Serious afflictions will be rare as will inexplicable behavior such as impulsivity.   We will no longer be a mystery to ourselves because biology and psychology will be taught in schools and help make us more aware.  Bad behavior in school will be examined for causes, rather than simply punished, so that all children will learn about themselves and about feelings.  Feeling people can teach better because they understand the world and themselves better.   They teach about the feeling capacity of animals and how we must take care with them.   They teach kindness so that we make schools and our families pleasant places.   Home will be soothing and calm; not shouting and bickering, nor a place for punishment.    There will be no need to punish; almost none of us learn from it.  And parents who are not harassed welcome their children home from school with a smile and joy.  The child feels wanted and cared for.  So a child, deprived of emotion, will not grow up and become a victim of the first person who says he wants her or that he is interested in her.  She will have enough of herself to see it all objectively.

   Part of feeling is to be considerate of the environment--we live in and from. No using beach or street as an ashtray.  No throwing trash anywhere.
We keep our environment clean; not so difficult.  And we eat well because we understand and cherish our insides; we treat it well, not abusing it with cigarettes and alcohol.   So little addiction that it will not be a great problem; no need to kill imprinted pain because there will be so little.