I am going to wax egocentric and use me as an example of what can go wrong in life.  I have pondered how is it that a child can live 20 years with his parents and never once be touched, hugged or kissed.  Even by accident.   How could it happen that a parent does not ever put her arm around her child?   I know.  It was my life, never a good approving word from them.  It drove me to seek approval everywhere and to do the things that might elicit a wee bit.   In my case, my father could not express anything, good or bad.  His greatest curse word was “What the sam hill”?  It happens to children with parents whose neo-cortex is not driven by the feeling brain. No thought is underlain by feelings and therefore there is no feeling underlying what is happening.  It is totally driven by the neo-cortex; and then we go to the cognitive/behavioral therapist to understand why; and there is no solution there.  Because no one is dealing with passion and with feeling.    They are dealing with disembodied brain that cannot get down to the feeling level because of deep repression/gating that blocks the passage.   The result: passels of professionals concocting theories and therapies that are intellectually enforced: “I have my own hammer and I will use it willy-nilly on all patients irrespective of what is wrong with them.”  Theories that are produced from on top, not intruding from below, riding feeling saves to inform the theory about and with passion and feeling.  The theory and therapy remains uninformed.  So in this barren, sterile word we have a parent who tucked my favorite dog, left him alone in the street and drove away.

So why on earth does a shrink, have to recognize the deep brain?  Aah  I know why. Because the firepower behind most of our behavior lies the brainstem and lower limbic system. We cannot understand human psychology without reference to them.  And because patients usually choose a therapist they feel in touch with, the bright person will choose an erudite intellectual for help; a help that can never arrive.  A “loosey goosey” type will choose an anything goes, way-out-there therapist or someone who calls herself a therapist.  So in the first case they get case studies, statistics and ideas devoid of science; while in the second case, they get unscientific voodoo where anything goes.  What they don’t get is cure.

Patients go to get their neuroses reinforced.

The patients can get help, and it has been called “help” for decades, as if there were no hope for cure.  You need feelings to be sensitive, to care and be concerned, to be insightful and perceptive.   And you only get them in therapy when their importance is understood.  You cannot teach anyone to be a good therapist, sensitive and insightful.  We all learn that as a result of a feeling  therapy or better yet, growing  up loved.

It seems as though I am saying that shrinks need to know paleontology well or have a degree in anthropology.  Nope.  Just an awareness of the importance of the levels of brain function.  Never be fooled by that narrow band of cortex into thinking that thinking is the sine qua non.

We can imagine animals life millions of years ago without being experts in their history.  A therapist needs to understand the brain that is lodged deep, deep, down in the brain and must see what influence it can have on our thinking, impulses,  feelings and behavior.  He needs to be an absolute aficionado  of science to see how evolution has carried us along.  And above all, to understand the notion of resonance: how there is a neuronal/chemical trail that leaves its traces behind on our genes.  We need to retrace its steps to see how those traces evolved; to see how we always have had an alarm system, only over time that system diminished and so we lost touch with the actual danger.   Even though the danger remained hidden and sequestered.   Our bodies will not shut off the alarm, leaving us anxious without knowing why.   An anxiety state is a terror state. But over the millennia the top level became so alienated from deep down in the brainstem where terror is organized, that it had its name changed and we call it by some bastard word; terror had a rebirth and is now anxiety; but a rose by any other name...

It is such a waste:  they ruin your life and then you carry on ruining it on your own without their help.  Suppose you, by some chance, choose Primal Therapy.  You go on suffering for years for what they did to you.  More often what they did to you is repressed and you go on with your life, such as it is.  But if you choose a feeling therapy; beware because many unfeeling people call themselves a feeling therapy; those who do booga booga.  The point is that reliving history undoes history.  To confirm this we shall soon embark on research with our therapy that goes back and undoes our history and allows us, in a way, to be born again.  It is worth the price of admission to be able to shed our pain.  It is miraculous, but not a miracle.  We are going to look at the traces of methyl on our genes and see how dense they are and how vulnerable they are to change.   We will quantify the amount of pain and the amount of resolution with our therapy. I have written about our peer reviewed studies in the World Congress of Psychiatry.

To me it is miraculous that we still have elements in us that belong to ancient creatures millions of years ago. Even more, how powerful those forces remain in us human beings and drive us, make us compulsive and obsessive, behave beyond our control and commit crimes that reflect those rage-full terrorizing epochs.

Let me give you a tragic example.   My colleague today sent me an article and photos of babes whose mothers smoked while carrying.  They had no idea of the harm they do, and we must educate all young people who plan on having babies;  do not take anything in that can harm your baby: not one drink, not one cigarette, not one painkiller and no tranquilizers.  All if this will change his brain system and biology for life.  He will not get over it.




These are ultra sound photos of unborn babies. (From Durham and Lancaster Universities  in the U.K.)(http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/24/smoking-while-pregnant-_n_6930678.html)
They are self explanatory.  And it points out for all time how what the mother ingests, harms the baby, almost without exception.  Those scans, collected at 24 and 36 weeks of womb-life, show a rate of mouth movements much higher than normal. Worse they raise their arms to look for protection it seems, but there isn’t any for them.  They are suffering!  The nicotine in the mother’s cigarettes can change the central nervous system of the baby and with it certain brain functions.  Again, they are suffering  and they start life in pain.  It becomes imprinted and changes them for a lifetime.  Their whole system is defective from the start.  How can any feeling mother do that to her child? And above all, how can any therapist ignore these key critical windows and hope to do an effective psychotherapy?  Shame!