  You know, we have a lot of the answers and solutions right now to make this world a better,  decent place to live.   So if I ran the world what would happen?  Since I know about the effects of gestational and birth trauma on the rest of our lives, I would begin there.   Change everything.  Make sure that the conceiving parents are getting along because if they are not then the results will likely be allergies, diabetes, heart disease and cancer.  Many studies have shown that bickering, unhappy parents produce offspring prone to disease.   Making a baby won’t improve the marriage; it will only make it more risky for the baby.  So put off a baby until you are sure of each other and like each other.  And that goes for childbirth where trauma not only leads to disease later on but also creates angry and sometimes violent offspring.  These traumas impact brain development so that the cortical cells which should evolve normally are impaired and do not evolve as they should. There is less ability to repress and control input from both outside and in; the results will be learning problems and attention deficit disorders.   There will be all sorts of problems in school because the child cannot sit still, is anxious and cannot concentrate.   There is ample research now that gestational trauma can set up the vulnerability to later cancer.

  And how do we improve our perceptions of others?  Once we are in touch with our feelings we can ”denicher” what others are like; we can see below the surface and know what is inside others.   We will no longer be surprised by who they really are one year later when we prepare for a divorce.   And when we are feeling beings, we can feel it when someone loves us.  If we are imprinted from early on with a feeling of being unloved we need constant reassurance from someone else about his or her love, and often it is not enough.  Being imprinted with “unloved” begins just after birth when we are left alone and crying inside a baby bassinette. No one comes to soothe and make us feel protected, wanted and loved.  Then just after birth there are no loving, warm parents around to hug and caress us.  It seals in the unloved feeling that later on no one can fulfill.   It is possible that parents meant well but an illness can leave them at a disadvantage.

  What all this love does is help empty out the hospitals and produce a much healthier population.   Much less absenteeism and much less suffering, and that counts, little agony and suffering.  People will feel better and that means less anger toward the children and spouse.  If you don’t feel good you are not fun to be around.

  Take one case.  A child being carried suffers when the parents bicker, so much so that her chances of asthma and allergies are much greater; several research studies confirm this.  Now she makes frequent trips to the emergency room together with long stays in hospital.  She is unhealthy and cannot do sports; she gains weight and has to take constant medication.  She cannot hike in the wilderness nor have animals.  The pollens make her sick.   She cannot marry because she is a burden.  She suffers nearly all of the time, looking for new medications.   She has to drop out of school because her asthma is critical.   The anxiety or angst she developed in the womb when her parents were fighting stays with her and keeps her from concentrating.  It is not just that the parental relationship produced allergies but it also installed a high level of tension which produced ADD so that her school work suffered.  She had allergies, severe at times, which upset her mental balance as well.  There was so much that she was not allowed to do because of her affliction.  She was, in short, damaged goods.   Worse, she had no idea what that was, or what caused it, where it came from and what to do about it. More and more allergy tests, more and more medication and more trips to the clinic.  Because her mother was allergic they (she and doctors) decided it was heredity.  And no doubt there may have been a bit of that too.  We never think that arguing parents are damaging the fetus, but they are.  Because when they finish with their bickering it still goes on in the child, perhaps for a lifetime.  It is an imprint.  She was unwell and irritable a lot. Short with her children and sarcastic with her husband. Also most impatient and demanding.  It went on because she never felt “right.”  She blamed everything and everyone because she had no grip on what was wrong.

   She and all her cohorts would stop going to clinics and hospitals in my world and the hospitals would be largely empty.  Doctors would no longer be stumped and misdiagnose ailments because they would take into account the generating sources of the problem; knowing where to look for origins. Patients could help out because they would know so much more about themselves and their inner lives.  Their top level brain would no longer be divorced from the lower levels where so much angst gets its start.  What a relief to know who you are marrying and why, and what a relief to have a partner who is fully sexual because all the early repression and blockage is no longer there and may have never been there.

    And just think of the money we save on drug wars because there is far less addiction simply because there is far less pain engraved inside of us.  We don’t need to waste resources tracking down dealers because there is no drug market.  Smart doctors will give painkillers to those in pain.  No more murders to claim ownership of the drug market.  With so little pain there is far less crime to rob pharmacies of their pain killers.   Everything changes.  Far less medical problems due to addiction.   Far less drive to find pills and far less need for pills to fall asleep.  There is no longer inner turmoil to roil our sleep patterns.  No more nightmares because most of them come from very early on and with good gestation and good birth there is no longer nightmare material.    No longer traumas engraved in our systems to dog and drive us for a lifetime.  No more the inability to rest and relax; no more the need to keep moving.  ahhhhh