There is a story in today’s paper about an overeater and how they are going to treat him. And I thought, “Do they know why people overeat?” For the same reason that they overdrink and overdrug and overbuy and overtravel and over and over. So. When anyone does more than is “normal” it means they are filling old needs as well as current ones. That is, there is the current need which triggers off the old need and makes for “over.” Now why do that? Because there are order levels of needs that correspond to levels of consciousness. The first line deep brain level has the urgency of life and death. It is not necessarily the need to eat but perhaps the need to live, the need for adequate oxygen and nutrients. But that need stays open and unfulfilled. When there is a current need, say, for food it can trigger off the old need and it drives the “over.” The same on the second line when a child was not fed enough or perhaps fed too much based on the anxiety of the parent. It is still an unfulfilled proper need and that can drive the later “over.”

OK, so there are levels of need, and as we descend down the chain of consciousness those needs get far more urgent because they often involve life and death events. So when the fattie sees food he goes crazy with urgency because the old need for survival is driving it. He eats for today, yesterday and the day before. The same for alcohol. One drinks now to be sociable. But drinking ten drinks is no longer social, it is pathologic. So let us not try to treat all this with current techniques when it is the past we must address. Somehow that has eluded all the drug and alcohol abuse centers. It is not a lifestyle we need to change; it is one’s whole history, his physiology and brain function. That is a bit more difficult. When Tiger Woods sees breasts he sees pussy because if you see his mother, that hard-bitten emotionless face, we see why he needs a woman’s love (now called sex). He needs one after another. Is he that sexual? His drive for oversex is old and new, but it is the old urgent unfulfilled need for love that makes it frantic in the present.
Now does anyone think his rehab is going to work? And by the way, what is a sex addiction. I know sex but addiction? If you like it as we all should, is it addicting? Only when it is inordinate. Most of us are not born with an inordinate sex drive but it becomes so when lack of fulfillment over years now drives sex. It could have driven food or money, but here it is sex.
We need and have found a way to dip into the remote past that drives so many “overs” and eliminate compulsive eating, drinking and drugging.

What Woods should have said is that it is no one’s business with what I do with my peepee. I did it cause my mother never loved me and that is that. I got it elsewhere. It was huge because my leftover need was huge.