I swear I try to avoid nonsense, but when it stares me in the face, and when it appears in a scientific journal, I feel I must reply.  Scientific American published a piece on anger and anxiety by cognitive people where there is not one word about what anxiety is or how to treat it except … except through changing your mind and thinking your way to health.  (Sci. American 1-4-13).

   What the article states is that we cannot always avoid what upsets us, so we need to reframe the experience; that is, look at it differently and deny our feelings.  In short, use our prefrontal cortex to suppress our feelings.  But of course suppression does nothing to eliminate the causes of anxiety.  And therein lies the rub; the imprint lying below still continues to do its damage to our organs and behavior. No denial can change that.

  It all depends here on their experiment;  (by Dominik Mischkowski and others), where they had a group of volunteers (students), led them to believe they were waiting to start, kept them waiting, were curt with them, and later asking them to reimagine the situation.  There is more but that is essentially it.  What that has to do with real anxiety, I do not know.  It seems more like annoyance.  Their conclusion:  the next time a car zips in front of you don’t focus on the anger.  Imagine yourself looking at if from a distance, and “KEEP YOUR EMOTIONS AT ARMS LENGTH.”  Some advice.   Keep feelings at a distance…..and become robots?  Or what?  Is this science?

   What they say is that it is not hard to dwell on the bad but focusing on the good could be the difference between health and sickness.  It is quite the opposite; denying feelings makes you sick and hurries along a premature death.  I have quoted study after study to this effect in my books.  But look at the logic of it: keeping down and suppressing feelings is healthy?  I suppose you could come to that conclusion if you deny history, deny imprints and neurological science and focus only on the present, which the cognitive people do ad nauseam.  Feelings are the essence of life; why would we want to deny them?  But scientists who live in their heads can do this because they do.  So when a loved one dies we are supposed to think, how can I think about this differently?   Crying is so essential that those who cannot cry fully need to go to grieving therapy to learn to cry so as to get some relief.
Can we really think our way to health?  When over-thinking is the way to sickness.   Those who come to us who live in their head have to learn to recapture their feelings again and become human.

  And if all else fails in their approach, they say it helps to write a journal about it; another way of keeping it intellectual.  Why not feel those feelings; they are a natural response, not an aberration to be hidden and forgotten.   There is a reason that feelings exist,  otherwise, evolution would have denied and eliminated them.  They are a survival mechanism and as important as hunger and thirst.   Feelings inform us who is good for us and who isn’t.  Especially who is not is good for us and wo will not be dangerous.   Feelings predate thoughts and long before we think they inform us about life.   They are life, in essence….ecstasy, beauty and love.  When  you lose your feelings, you are dying.

  What I think happens is that advanced university graduates apotheosize the intellect and denial is their way of life which they then elevate to the level of a theory.  And then they find a therapy that accommodates this concoction (sorry, but it is a concoction out of their life style).   They  help patients get sicker in the name of psychological health.  After all, they made it through life with their intellect, why not the rest of us?

  They use phrases such as “moving past unwanted, negative feelings.”  And they dress it up with a “scientific” phrase called self’-distancing.  All that means is how to run away from feelings.  Do I sound angry?  I am, because people read science to find out how they can feel better not die earlier.    They note that denying feeling is healthy coping while suffering and feelings is unhealthy coping.

  So it is a turn on the old idea of thinking your way to health.  Why are our feelings unwanted?  They are natural reactions, not aliens.   The researchers recommend being distant from feelings.  Is that mental health or is that denial in the name of mental health?  And denial is not just an idea; it means repressing feelings and most often that is not healthy, unless you want cancer and heart disease.