It is those deep and remote imprints that set up a background of pain that need quieting. But until we understand early imprints we can never find a cure for deep addiction. Let’s say it again: stress in the carrying mother is passed on to the baby in the womb. The stress receptors undergo serious change and helps produce the platform for the baby’s latent stress/anxiety level; all because of bickering over time between the parents. And chronically high stress levels not only decrease immune function but increase the possibility of tumor growth (in animal studies). So when we come down with cancer at thirty we need to change our diet and exercise more, stop smoking, etc. etc., but most importantly, we need to see if the carrying mother was under stress; was there spousal fighting or was there a war going on? Was the mother depressed? These are the factors that count so much. These are the intangibles that create so much tangible wreckage. Reuter’s Health (Aug. 21, 20012) reports that mothers who smoked while pregnant gave birth to children with a much greater risk of asthma.(See )

 Speaking of serious disease--cancer, there are many studies extant correlating parental abuse with later cancer. A study (“Children abused by parents face increased cancer risk.” Purdue University, Science Daily, July 17,20012, see http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/07/120717121922.htm ) from Purdue University found that adults who were emotionally and physically abused as children had a much greater likelihood of cancer as adults. The more intense the abuse, the more likely the cancer. Imagine now if we have left out of the mix one of the greatest risks of all: constant abuse while in the womb—a drugged mother, a depressed one, someone who is chronically anxious or tense and angry. Add that to it all and you have one of the great causes of later cancer. Mind you, that the critical period for so many functions lies in gestation. It is a time when the imprints that are laid down are engraved into the system and almost impossible to eradicate. The damage sticks and has lifelong effects. We carry that primal burden every minute of our lives and there is no escaping it. It is the appointment in Samarra again. In the old tale, someone fears that death is coming to get him and moves to a remote city (Samarra) to escape him, only to find that death has changed his plans and will be coming to Samarra. There is no escape from primal pain, and yet many of us spend our lives running from it.

 It is clear that if we want cure, we need to descend to the lower depths, the zone of the interior to read the notes from the underground. Those notes have a most painful message, can only be read a bit at a time. An example of delving deep: below so much of depression lies hopelessness (I have written extensively on this). If we could relive current hopelessness we would still be dogged by a memory where mother smoked or drank and endangered the life of the fetus. In short, depression would persist because of preverbal experiences that were never resolved. It would be deep and unexplained depressions, a seeming mystery because it comes from so deep and such remote places. We would alleviate the depression when we addressed some of it (hopelessness) in current life but it never would be cure. If you do not believe in imprints then all is lost and you will never arrive at the generating sources of an affliction or symptom.

 Let’s be more explicit. When we are depressed there are biochemical elements involved in addition to the psychological symptoms. Those same elements in inchoate form exist in the womb so that when the mother smokes incessantly or drinks, the baby cannot escape: the biochemistry kicks in and there is the starting basis for depression. It is that aspect of depression/hopelessness that resonates when one feels depressed in the present. When the fetus is in an inescapable situation and feels helpless and hopeless, as when he is suffused with smoke that reduces oxygen supply that the elements of depression occur. It is not called that in a six month old fetus but he now is beginning to have the building blocks for it later on when we can give it a name…depression. It is repression raised to a higher level, due to the tremendous force of the original imprint. And what can happen when the fetus is overwhelmed with the inescapable input is that the brain does what it can to combat that deleterious input; sometimes the brain is pushed to such a limit that the seeds of serious mental illness are set down. The brain is awash in the massive imprint, which does not go away. It starts with ADD when the child is young and deteriorates later on into mental illness. And when he goes to a doctor to see what is wrong…..heredity can be the only answer……because no one can imagine the imprint and its effects. And no one can imagine the epigenetic effects of how memories are sealed in early on. One way is through methylation (adding part of a methyl group to an imprint). This changes how the genes are expressed or not, and that leads us to claiming something is hereditary when it results from experience that changes how heredity is expressed. But more on cure in a moment.

 There is not a great deal of difference here between physical and emotional pain. When someone feels lonely or rejected she hurts just as if she were burned. Part of the limbic system is critical in both kinds of hurts (the anterior cingulate cortex lights up in both). Being rejected in high school (possibly a critical period in some) can leave a residue of that feeling for the decades to come. It leaves an actual mark so that in a recent study those with chronic feelings of rejection died much sooner than controls who did not feel that way. (see: “Childhood Trauma Leaves a Mark on the brain.” Translational Psychiatry, January 15, 2013. Carmen Sandi et al; see http://medicalxpress.com/news/2013-01-childhood-trauma-brain.html ). Loneliness can be traced all the way back to just after birth when a child must be held and caressed. If he is not held, then he hurts for a lifetime and dies sooner. Pain and repression kill. Neurotics die earlier. It turns out that chronically lonely people are more likely to suffer Alzheimers and Parkinson disease. Wherever we look we find the same thing: early trauma has terrible effects later in life. (see: Social Science and Medicine. Vol 74) What is most important from my perspective is that when the brain is marked by trauma, it helps deplete serotonin supplies; and when that happens we have what I call “leaky gates’ for a lifetime. We are then less effective in our efforts to repress. Pain roils the brain. We are disturbed and cannot concentrate or learn. This was found in a study in Quebec, Canada (June, 2012. European Neuro-pharmacology; see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22257439 ). Traumas around birth showed lower serotonin in the hippocampus. (lower C-AMT trapping). Here the study reports that limbic pathways were impaired during birth trauma and there was a greater vulnerability for psychiatric disorders later on. Here we see that birth trauma can affect us for most of our lives, and that happens when serotonin is so weakened that it cannot do its job of repression. The gates are leaky. And what do we prescribe for this condition? Something that makes up for what was impaired at birth……serotonin. Prozac is exactly that drug that boosts missing supplies. And why does serotonin play such a role? Because it is largely a “gate-keeper.” It provides the defenses we need against pain. It is the missing molecule depleted when traumatic birth occurred. It is making up for what is missing. We take it to try to feel normal; to normalize. We have to keep on doing it until we go back to the original trauma and relive it, making the connection that is integrating and resolving. Then we don’t need pills every day. We no longer try to replace missing parts; we re-establish harmony and change what is missing. Our studies showed that. Patients low in serotonin at the start of therapy came up to normal at the end (Imipramine Binding, Paris, 1982). What this shows is “cure”; levels become normal due to primal/reliving. It was more than an amelioration and more permanent. Here is what cure is about: making permanent change, not trying this or that to see what works. We need a theory to achieve cure in psychology.


 Sticks and stones can break my bones but words can really hurt me.

 Recently, they have found a specific neurosis associated with a birth trauma: namely obsessive-compulsive disorder. Thus, children with OCD are much more likely to suffer a birth trauma than controls. (J. Adol. Psychopharmacology. 2008, August; 18 -4- 373-9, see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2935829/ ). And the question is, why does this reaction get imprinted and lasts so long? Because it is essential for survival that we remember what is dangerous and how to react to it. We need to have the capacity to feel terror and get galvanized to react immediately. Survival is rarely a leisure activity. Part of this is that the secretion of nor-adrenaline affects the amygdala and elements of the brainstem, which are mobilized. We become hyper-alert and ready for action, and this alertness interacts with the memory system to direct our efforts.

By the way, the same has been found for bi-polar disorder. Not a surprise, and I have written about this for 45 years.

 It turns out that there are signs of oncoming panic. (Scientific American, Aug. 3, 2011) The subject is usually not aware of dizziness, trembling, agitation, that form the precursor of panic attacks. It is as though the pain/terror is on the rise and we are not aware of it until it is full-blown. Because the terror is set down so early, in the beginning months of gestation and imprinted so deep in the brain, we have no idea where it comes from. Terror surely begins its life in the brainstem and in archaic parts of the limbic system (amygdala). It is only when the gates falter and the terror bursts through that we become aware of it. Being aware is only half the job; then the work begins……getting to the source and reliving it.