The Cause of Some Cancers: Not What You Think

Our theory is not just something “nice or interesting or amusing.” It is life- saving. It means reversing serious mental illness. We see this all of the time. Many of us think that good diet will prolong life, and it is true. But few are aware that repression makes us sick and can kill us prematurely. Repression kills because it distorts basic physiology and detours brain development. And repression forces the kind of unhealthy eating habit that makes us sick early on. Repression kills because, unconsciously, it forces us to deal with imprinted pain every minute of our lives. It forces us to find ways to act out feelings or suppress them. The wonder is how we all manage to keep deep pain stored away, never once acknowledging it. The body does, however, and gets sick. And it makes us sick on the deep cellular level, the level where the early imprints lie. All the pressure to keep pain stored puts the cellular development at risk; eventually we find serious illness, which should not be a mystery but a foregone conclusion.

Consider the research on twins done by scientists from London’s Institute of Cancer Research who found that the origins of leukemia are prenatal (Ma et al., 2013). The researchers there delved deeper into the disease process by looking at cases where both twins had developed acute lymphoblastic leukemia, a cancer of the white blood cells. They studied the DNA inherited from both parents, completing a full genome study on their subjects. They found that
womb-life was a culprit in the development of the disease. They believe that the mutations accounting for it must have come from the womb. Other mutations may have come after birth. The results prompted another British biologist, Dr. Julie Sharp of Cancer Research UK, to suggest that further study could lead to better cancer treatment. Quoted by the BBC News, Sharp said, “Studies like this could reveal new ways to target the very roots of cancer and help us better understand how the disease develops over time. Survival rates have increased significantly over the past decades thanks to research, but there is still more to
do to make treatments better with fewer side-effects."(20)

Now I must ask the question: how about finding out what happened in the womb that forced these mutations? That seems to be overlooked as mission impossible. But it is not; we can find fairly closely what happened during womb- life to produce mutations. They are looking to alter those mutations by examining the mutation itself. But the basis of all this is that something goes
wrong in the womb while the mother is carrying. It can be external forces such as war or more personal events such as a husband who leaves home, leaving the mother chronically anxious or depressed. The permutations are myriad, but the result is an imprint that causes a deviation and ramification of many functions, from brain circuitry to vital organs.

I will hypothesize that Primal Therapy can help prevent cancer if we have the time to go deep enough. I am not stating that in every case, but we have little cancer among our patients and we believe that Primal Therapy can be a factor. In short, I think cancer originates deep in the brain often during womb-life, and that is exactly what we treat. We do not treat this or that bit; we treat the central organizing factor of the whole system.

20: Scientists track leukaemia's origins 'back to the womb' (2013, April 9). Retrieved from http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-31622341