We have a triune brain—3 brains in one, with each one having a different evolution, different function and a different survival system. The reason that this is important is that when we begin our evolution our brain is not fully developed. So when there is a trauma while we are being carried or at birth it is imprinted in the lowest brain level, and therefore, we can only react with that level which is the most developed brain system at the time. This is important because it is in this deep brain system that terror exists, and we can react to terrible events with terror; which is how we know where and when something is imprinted, and where that anxiety can come from, and can only come from. When a person with chronic anxiety comes into our clinic we know where we have to go eventually, and that if we do not go there the person will always have a tendency to anxiety.

In the same way when we have a migraine patient we know that its origin may well be at birth or before when the blood circulation and oxygen level is inadequate (mostly during the birth trauma). So an upset at the age of thirty that leads to a migraine means there is a deeper level substrate that is set off; if not, there is no migraine. There may be severe upset but not deep enough to elicit a terrible headache. So there are levels we deal with that are precise and contribute in their own way to trauma. Let’s put it another way: when there is a migraine it means that there is a very early imprint involved that involved the oxygen supply. And when the person has deep internal access and there is no longer the migraine it means it has been resolved; or perhaps that deep level trauma never existed. But if she always had migraines chances are that level imprint has always been there. Thus, the kind of symptom points to when the imprint was registered, and more important, the resolution of that symptom means the person now has deep access. And by implication, with that kind of access one may well live much longer because the pain is no longer aggravating the system. Deep catastrophic imprints often lead to catastrophic symptoms, which is one way we know what level of imprint we are dealing with. Thus when we have deep mid-line trauma resulting in sex problems, either frigidity or premature ejaculation, we know where we must for resolution. And we know about the nature of the imprint—-sympathetic nervous system and premature ejaculation, or parasympathetic nervous system and lack of sexuality.

An overload of anesthetic at birth can lead to parasympathetic dominance, and the opposite when there was a struggle and success at birth.

When there is a life-and-death struggle at birth due to lack of oxygen (anoxia), for example, the existing reactive system is activated (impeded oxygen circulation), but because it cannot fully respond due to the complete load of pain (to feel it completely would be to die, or at least to lose consciousness), it reacts partially within its biologic limits and then puts the excess part of the terror away for good keeping; it houses it until our system is strong enough to feel and resolve it. It lives behind our repressive gates. And when triggered will lead to a migraine; that migraine tells a story of our history; of how it all happened and how we reacted originally, perhaps decades ago. And now we see how ahistorical therapy cannot resolve the migraine problem and why, therefore, the great push for migraine pills: a failure of psychotherapy.

However, we continually respond to this stored terror with chronically high stress hormone levels, a compromised immune system, misperceptions, strange ideas, nightmares, and chronic malaise: all the contributions from the different levels of consciousness; from different parts of the triune brain.

During a primal therapy session, when a person has access to feelings and the connection is finally made there is first great hurt and then great relief. In a primal experience (reliving an early lack of love completely), there is such a rush of pain that the defense system is temporarily overwhelmed, gating is weakened, and symptoms appear. These are often deep-brain originated and lead to life-threatening symptoms, because it was originally life-threatening at the time of the imprint. Symptoms mean a non-connected state. And clearly, it is connection that resolves the symptom. That is why connection has to be the goal of therapy, and not simply the release of tension.