So, is pain just a matter of our imagination, and can we imagine it not to hurt?  
It is all part of the study of placeboes where they convince the subject that pain won’t hurt, pretend to inject him with pain killing drugs but give him neutral saline, put his hand in very hot water, and he doesn’t hurt.  His beliefs, and a whole groups of subjects went along with this, dominated the physical reality.  What we think takes precedence over what is actually happening to us.

So how does that happen?  Well, it seems that part of the network of the convinced is the anterior cingulate cortex, rich in opioid receptors, and what it does is influence to suppress the pain suppressing function of the brainstem.  So beliefs travel key neuronal pathways, the same as pills might do, to shut down and diminish pain.  What this also does is increase the activity of parts of the prefrontal cortex, which can also work to control pain.  Beliefs can stimulate pain suppression. Should I say that again?  Beliefs supplant pain in many cases; hence the fervor of religion.  What is also important is that these beliefs also enhance the effectiveness of pain killers taken by subjects.  It is not that pain is only in our minds, where else would it be, but that the mind can stop processing it, detouring it and burying it under strong ideas and beliefs.  And all this shows in brain scans (MRI).

The problem is that those who are shut off to their own pain, being reared in a non-feeling atmosphere, cannot feel the hurt in others. Their whole system is blunted.  We see this in politicians who seem heartless. They are responding not to logic or feelings but to votes; that is their raison d’etre.  They cannot feel the suffering of others because that suffering cannot combat the power and money of those who get him elected and help him stay elected.  I sometimes think the world is divided into two camps; those who feel and those who don’t.  And the feelers are derided by those who are shut down as “bleeding heart liberals.”  Because they feel for others and their suffering.   First, one needs to be contact with one’s own feelings before one can feel for others and that is not easily done.  It means opening up the system to let pain in, and not many will let that happen.

I have seen this directly when patients touch on brainstem, first-line pains, and come up with, “I have been saved.  He won’t let me hurt.”  They manufacture a phantom in their heads that stops the pain.  Those beliefs are meant to stop suffering; one of the great reasons for the evolution of the neo-cortex, to block too much hurt.

What they have been finding of late is that it is mostly when the report of no pain is delivered by the subject and not measured objectively that there is success.  And this is the problem we have with those who have spent months or years with mock-primal therapists, because they are convinced that they have made progress while in reality they are wrecks.  It takes us many months just to undo the damage before their therapy can commence.  This is especially true when the patient believes he went to us, since they often advertise as primal specialists in their paper work and catalogues.  How can the average non-therapist know any better?    So unless I have not made my point, let me state again that those who suffer gravitate to the healers who pretend some training with primal and they are then hypnotized into believing them and in them.  Then the damage begins.  It is the placebo effect; they believe they are getting better.  They are discharging tension and that feels good, but that is not getting better.  Too often it means getting worse.