I often state what connection is, and one of my staff offered a slight modification and I think he may be right.  I say that connection is the sine qua non of primal therapy. Without connection there is neither healing nor cure.  So, clearly it is crucial.   If there is no connection to solidify the feeling there is no progress.

So what is connection, after all?  It means that while the patient is feeling and reliving she is connecting to the pain/fear/terror. Bit by bit as she relives and feels she is making a connection to something buried away for perhaps years.  As we feel we connect but not a random scream or cry, feeling something context; where it all began.  That is eventually where patients need to go.   Crying and screaming is relieving but not healing.  It is just a release of the energy of feeling without meaning.  There is a great gap between reliving and relieving, and this is the mistake so-called mock therapists make all of the time.  Abreaction looks like feeling but it is not; and abreaction requires that the person perform the mock feeling over and over again—relieving not reliving.

It is the difference between history where the generating sources of pain lie, and the present; going through the motions of feeling without its depth and history.  Remember,  we are connecting deep down physiologically,  feeling the  part of our history that has been sequestered.  And feeling the physical aspects of the pain, as well.

The goal of our therapy is to retrieve memory, not only of the scene or the place but of the feelings belonging to them; that is what has been repressed and held in storage, the pain and terror. When patients experience those feelings they become integrated. They are aware of the feelings even though they may not know exactly when it happened originally. It is the feeling that counts. Actually, I mean “the sensation.” Sensations pre-date feelings by millions of years. Previously their valence caused them to be repressed (otherwise there is overload), and thereby made them an alien force, unable to integrate with the rest of our system. When they are fully felt they are now part of us. It is how the first line connects. We connect, in short, on the level of the trauma and in that context only. And as the reliving goes on, there is a continuous drop in vital signs, arriving below baseline.

         We cannot make progress on the third-line cognitive level alone. We can become aware of why we act the way we do but nothing changes biologically; thus getting well only in our head. Our biology has been left out of the therapeutic equation. It is like being aware of a virus, which usually does not kill it. So again, connection means liberation of feelings in context. That last caveat, in context, is important. There are those who scream and writhe and cry out of context, as in an exercise. They make no profound change, but when the patient slowly descends to deep levels over time and reacts to the stimuli and events on that level with the neurological capabilities of that era, there is progress.

         One way we control our hypotheses is to measure vital signs, which we do with every session. Feeling the terror physiologically can bring down the vital signs on its own. Over time there is also a significant drop in cortisol levels and enhanced natural killer cells. (see my book Primal Healing for discussion). The key metabolic changes also include a permanent one-degree lowering of body temperature; since body temperature is factor in our longevity and the work of our bodies it is an important index. It all means that we are getting to the pain and undoing repression.