When we do things we cannot understand we are driven by unseen forces. That much is clear. So when we believe in unseen forces, UFOs, for example, it is a logical extension of what drives us. When so much of life seems like a mystery; why we develop symptoms, why we act out in sexual rituals, why we get migraines or why we have high blood pressure, it is logical that we believe in mysteries, especially the mystery of life. So we go to church and they have answers for us. And they encourage us to pray to unseen forces and to obey unseen deities. And then we go to school and pledge allegiance to unknown entities, and of course, again a deity.

And then we grow up and want to run for office but we know that no one can ever get elected who does not believe in unseen forces; should you decide to declare that you don’t believe it is impossible to get elected.

So belief is pretty much decided for us. And what we can declare that we don’t believe is also decided for us; peer pressure is awfully strong. Wanting to belong, to be part of, is a powerful need, and sometimes we need to believe in order to fulfill that sense of belonging. So those who have no inner access are required to believe in mysterious forces, and that mystery is contagious among those with no inner life. And don’t think this is just in politics because when I talk about clarifying unseen and unknown forces in our unconscious the field of psychotherapy turns off, and this kind of believer becomes a pariah. It then becomes unsafe to believe in the depths of the unconscious unless we believe there are demons down there; an id, shadow forces and the like. As long as we keep it mysterious we are OK, accepted.

“Keep it unreal” becomes the motive, the slogan, and we fall in line. Psychologic truth becomes marginalized and the believers in mystery continue their hegemony. It is almost impossible for me to get an article in the N.Y. Times in or Psychological Journals because I eschew the mysterious. Now isn’t that a conundrum?