The same reasons that their gestation and birth epochs are so damaging.
Oh kind sir, please explain. And cut out all that pretentious language.

I will try to explain even while recent neuroscience is making headway on the problem. But their headway is too often an explanation of how to treat it and less about what causes it.  If people could see what I have seen over 50 years, I think that might agree with me about causes.  Why are so many dying of cancer?   Why are so many undergoing harmful birth practices? There is a relationship.   And apart from doctors’ birth practices there is also their advice:  “a couple of drinks should  not hurt any baby.”  Oh yes it does; it makes them dizzy and disoriented. They sense these effects during and after a Primal, in the same way they feel suffocated when the mother smokes. These are most harmful events.  And due to their load of pain they are not integrated.  Instead the brain uses some of its supply of methyl and leaves a trace on the gene, called methylation.  Here the pain is stored, remains active and continues to spread onto the system. It raises the cortisol level and adds methyl markers to the experience.  It also increases adrenaline levels so that the system is forced into hyperactivity to deal with the suffering.  The person is often not aware of any of this since it happened early on before language was available.

The earlier in life the imprint, the more devastating it is; it emanates from the deepest level brain, the brainstem. This is the structure of great reactions: where pain becomes agony; sad and a bit hopeless into, suicidal hopelessness, anger into rage; all of archaic responses we might expect from sharks or dinosaurs.  When a hurt is registered high up in the brain it translates it through resonance to lower and exaggerated reactions residing deeper in the brain where later emotional pains are registered. It is a neuronal train of neurons of similar valence and content join up to connect on deeper levels.  Let’s be clear:  one can be disappointed with the loss of a lover in adult life.  It can create anguish and misery; but if there lurks deeper down and very early in life a great loss of a mother, the current misery through the process of resonance descends to another emotional level where deeper pain is organized,  and the emotional consequences may be serious and even suicidal depression.  Any major hurt during gestation where deep brain levels are involved and where parasympathetic nervous system is engaged can produce heavy depression.  When the mother smokes without stop or takes drugs or when she is chronically depressed, can find its way into the developing system of the fetus.  In short, any event which blocks normal responses can produce a general suppression in the baby.  This is especially true during birth where egress is blocked and baby struggles and cannot get out by his own efforts.  His body gives up and defeat becomes imprinted. The result may well be a parasympathetic personality; passive, defeated, unable to be aggressive or fight for himself.  Why all that?  Because we are involved with deep level trauma and deep, often violent,  reactions.   When disease occurs we have the beginnings of later cancer or other catastrophic disease.   Catastrophic events lead often to catastrophic disease.  Brain stem responses often engender brainstem responses; deep-lying reactions and serious bodily disease.  That is, we reaction on the same level as the trauma.  The disease often pinpoints for us the origin of the disease. It says look here for answers; alas, too often we look elsewhere.

We often are not aware of all this as its origins are so deeply embedded but they are there. The current pain higher up, has now resonated with deep—lying traumas, roiling the whole system, detouring natural functions and preparing  us for serious afflictions later in life. The brainstem does not mess around; its reactions are major and life-endangering.  As major as a dinosaur response when danger lurks.  In the human when the mother drinks continuously, the baby cannot escape the system splashes into overdrive, as all reactions are exaggerated.  Yet full deep reactions, escape, is not possible so the suffering begins. Worse, we do not know it, but at the age of forty there lies a tumor, and no  one knows where it comes from or how it got its start.  So we embark on decades-long research to see how we can fight it, when we do not know what “IT” really is.   We fight it and wrestle with it but never get to its historic source, so we remain bereft.   “It” is so far removed, so deep in the brain we cannot imagine what went wrong, but one thing is likely: the trauma reached down and resonated very deep down where catastrophic reactions live in the brain.  It touched off dinosaur reactions and upset so much of us and changed our genetic destiny. We are often on a secret trip to cancer or Alzheimers disease, plunging forth with our load of first-line,  brainstem pain until a doctor during his exam says, “Have you had any trauma recently?   “Why do you ask, doctor?”   “Because I see something suspicious on your liver which we must look into.”   Oh my, I had no idea.

You know why you had no idea? Because ideas lie far above the origins, so of course you have no idea. You body knows and carries its memories forward to finally make you know.   And when you relive all this, then you really know because you are in touch with your body, at last.  And you feel the trauma for what it is because the pain is excruciating.  So Janov’s rule #1.  You are not suppose to know about deeply buried pain because it is so very painful.   And so you body is all conflicted.  Should I tell him or should I keep it secret so he does not suffer?  OK.  I won’t tell him and save his life; wait a minute; if you don’t tell him you may be killing him. Ayayay;  the Faustian bargain.  He goes along blithely unaware but his body is dying.

But he feels it, finally, in our feeling therapy, which opens up the neural gates and lays it all out for him;  it is the real fortune teller.  It spills out everything.  And it literally screams out its pain; there is no mistaking it.  Only a feeling therapy that engages the full brain can use it and react to it.  Finally, we can resolve it.
It can be extirpated from the system and let the body relax and normalize.  One way we know is that in our therapy there is a radical increase in Natural Killer cells after one year of therapy.  Their job, recently suppressed, was to be on the lookout for newly developing cancer cells and destroy them.   We don’t “know” about them but the immune system does and whips into action unbeknownst to us. That system is the  cancer marauder sniffing out danger and attacking.  It does what we would do if we were at all aware and conscious.  Yet we remain unconscious for self protection.  We remain unconscious to keep consciousness from being perturbed.  What a dilemma.  It is not us who made the Faustian bargain; it was our system trying to survive as best it could.  We live on, seemingly healthy, while our life is being cut short. A feeling therapy must be called upon to help out. The sine qua non, is to react to the trauma;  we cannot do that when we do not know it is there.  Full conscious permits that life-saving response. It hurts and I can scream it out. Screaming  itself in absentia, solves little but it is the way we acknowledge the pain.

We now understand that the imprint is aided and abetted by the process of methylation, in which the chemical methyl group is added to the genome to restrict its expression. In other words, the imprint is laid down, in part, by a change in the cell, as certain chemical reactions are taking place — hydrogen removal, methyl infusion, and so on. Methylation leaves an heritable imprint, one that can be passed down even from grandparents to their grandchildren, as research by Kerry Resslar has shown. So what we always thought was genetic may well be the result of very early experiences diverting the genetic legacy (Meaney, Aitken, Bodnoff, Iny, & Sapolsky, 1985; Janov, 2013). In short, the experiences of our forbearers can endure and be passed down the epigenetic chain – the inheritance of acquired characteristics. This is something science thought impossible not long ago.

Epigenetics had affected the function of the stress apparatus, what is called the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), a complex part of the neuroendocrine system that controls reactions to stress and influences many body processes, including digestion, the immune system, mood and emotions, energy storage and expenditure. A possible implication of these findings is that the changes are more or less permanent; they alter the gene’s activity, leading to later illness and suicidal tendencies. When the NR3C1 gene is less effective, it cannot produce the kind of alerting, galvanizing chemicals that help one fight through things. (Clearly, such trauma also diminishes an individual’s adaptive capacity). As a result, the body behaves as though it were constantly under stress. And there is ample evidence now that chronic stress can lead to serious disease.  Methylation marks enlighten us that disease is hidden below.  That trauma has occurred, and forced the system into hyper-vigilance. It is vigilant for a danger that has already occurred.  Too late.

Make yourself at home.