The well known surgeon dr. Mehmet Oz, writes in Time magazine (jan. 9/12) of a new therapy for high blood pressure. He believes it is a major departure from serious surgery, only it is also an invasive treatment. It is a catheter inserted into the femoral artery which the doctors help wend its way to the precise spot where key and relevant nerves are lying. Then a jolt of electricity and basta, it is all over.

Remember my warning about any therapy without a “why” in it. It can never be curative because it neglects generating causes; origins and memories. It treats the current symptom as THE problem, hence manipulating the patient away from sources. It bothers me that this is found in august journals with high level scientists behind it. Where is their curiosity? Do they ever wonder why it is there? Or is the symptom just taken as a “given” and the doctors go on from there.

If we could all finally agree that memory is imprinted; that it is done so, partially, through the process of methylation and acetylation and that it can endure for a lifetime, and begins not long after conception, that is drives later act-outs and symptoms without cease and is the energy source behind the continuation of the problem , then we would not make the mistake ad nauseam of forgetting about “why” in illness and personality problems. And all of us doctors and scientists would no ignore and neglect originating causes. Isn’t that simply and logical? Why is it ignored? Because doctors ignore their own deep-lying feelings and cannot imagine what is down there. It is simply not put into question.

We have treated blood pressure for 45 years with great success. We have achieved a lowering of 24 points in the hypertensive (high blood pressure) group. We watch causes as we observe patients reliving their historic memories and see how when they get to childhood pains there is an elevation of blood pressure, but when the patient gets down to first line, gestation and birth trauma there is an even greater rise. We don’t have to theorize; we see it, and moreover, at the end of the session there is a drop of pressure to below baseline or beginning session values. And over one year there is a continuous and permanent drop in blood pressure. Because we also create one degree less in body temperature after one year of therapy we have good reason to think we are prolonging life. There is slower metabolism, the body is working less hard and less internal pressure as measure by our blood pressure cuff. We have seen confirmation of all this when we put a permanent cuff on a patient during a session and see the volatility of blood pressure. In those who are parasympaths their tendency is for a drop in pressure, but for the great majority of patients the blood pressure goes up. And then goes down and normalizes.

We see the difference between abreaction, crying and screaming without context and a real Primal because with a connected feeling, going back to the generating sources, there is nearly always a drop in blood pressure below baseline which is not the case in abreaction. And might I add that nearly every clinic and professional out there proclaiming to do our therapy what they get is pure abreaction. They too, do not ask why and take the symptom for the disease.

We have seen some remarkable cases with extremely high blood pressure drop into the normal range after several months of therapy; here it is life-saving.

Now here is the problem with all this: you are zapping an outlet, a place for release of the pressure; then the system has to find another outlet, and it will. It can then become fatal because there is no longer a “biologic” outlet. The pressure builds until we crumble or cave in. We must always ask “WHY?” It is not different from the symptom of smoking. If I smack you in the head every time you pick up a cigarette, sooner or later you will stop and the symptom is “cured.” Well it is the same if we get inside and mess around with the mechanics of the outlet. In this way we don’t let the nerve circuits react as they should in their defensive maneuvers. We block the ability to react properly (maybe “normally?) and reroute the system including the brain system. We must know that a symptom often means that the system is reacting properly to a damaging input, an input that begins with our life in the womb. And this input causes dislocation of function; our brain circuits get rerouted. We want to be careful to take that away. Just like a presidential candidate wants to stop homosexuality by all kinds of tortuous methods. She doesn’t ask how the behavior comes about; through her prejudices and strong bias against it she wants to stamp it out completely. The idea is that it will no longer show; therefore it must have been “cured.”

Even a smart doctor as Dr.Oz has overlooked the “why”, and because of that we will never be able to say, “because.”