Being unloved changes your physiology and makes you vulnerable to stressors that ordinarily should not be damaging. In other words when you feel unloved, whether you know it or not, it puts you under permanent stress. Then when something like air pollution happens it can affect you much more than others.

New research from the Keck School of Medicine at USC (June 2011. Also Science Daily, June 25, 2011. “ Exposure to Parental Stress Increases Pollution-Related Lung Damage in Children”, Amer. J. of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine), shows that once we are neurotic (loaded with primal pain) outside events affect us more than normals. As traffic pollution increased in high stress households (not enough money, low education level, lack of health insurance and lack of air conditioning), lung function decreased. I am going to assume that it is not confined to traffic pollution. That carrying around a load of unloved pain makes us susceptible to things in life that ordinarily would not adversely affect us. It is rather obvious, isn’t it? When we walk around with high stress levels it doesn’t take much to slop over into symptoms. It just needs a trigger. So neurotics (high stress levels) will become allergic to antigens that would not affect a loved person, all else being equal. And they will spend their lives going to allergy specialists who will do test after test and never find neurosis. They will find the results of it but not “IT.”

What is worse, is that the neurosis may have been set in during our lives while we were being carried inside our mother. Her fights with her husband may be the key to why the allergy is there in the first place. Her stress becomes her baby’s stress level which the baby carries forward in life as an imprint. And so this child has a greater tendency to inflammation and infection later in life. Spells at the emergency clinic testify to that. In some cases there is a common pathway between the pain of being unloved or traumatized very early on and the effects of antigens or pathogens. They live in the same house, so to speak, and react as an ensemble. Suffice to say that when your physiology is seriously affected other bad things will affect it and you will suffer. Not just from the antigens or bacteria, but from a body that is totally vulnerable before you even set foot on this planet.

So now we get an idea about such afflictions such as epilepsy, or migraines or high blood pressure, etc. For when there is a bit of damage it plays on the neurotic platform and thereby lowers the bar for symptoms. In short, neurosis, adds to the physical damage in such a way that the symptom becomes manifest, or apparent. And without the background of neurosis there may be damage, let’s say, antigens, pollen in abundance, yet no allergic symptoms. That is why we have had success with epileptics and migraine sufferers; we have raised the bar against their appearance. In other words, we have lowered the possibility for symptoms by lowering the background noise. The allergy may still be there, at least its tendency, but it is not enough to make us sick.