I just saw one of the worst films ever by well known professionals.   It never moved me for a second and yet here was a man who helped change the entire world but you would never know it by the film.  Too many intellectuals in the mix in the film called Steve Jobs.  But here is a much worse crime; someone using name, books and therapy to promote himself as a Primal Therapist.  So what is the crime?    Pretending to help Jobs when there was no chance of that happening.  That is the danger of the charlatans.   It is a precise science that takes years to learn.  Some professional cannot just pick up a book and know how to do it.  Who suffers?  The patient; in Job’s case it was fatal.

I have no idea what was wrong with Jobs nor if I could have helped him, but we have treated seriously ill patients.  And some with success.  With a charlatan it cannot be said because they fool around, hoping that something might happen.   This is no different from the myriad of addiction clinics springing up who offer good diet, exercise given by professionals,  talk sessions in group  or otherwise, and with no scientific results whatsoever.  Worse, no control at all by government nor scientists.

Where do these people get the idea that they can fool around in psychotherapy without  proper scientific backgrounds?  No measureable results?  They want to be loose and free and do whatever they think might help.

This is not a game, but unfortunately there are no laws or laws to follow since therapy in history has been pretty much of a game, where anyone can play. So they add dance therapy and  massages to help patients feel better while ignoring the cause.  Do those “healers” really believe they are treating a serious affliction?  Or are they selling hope?   They are selling a concept, an idea to fill the heads of the sufferers and patients are encouraged to recount at how much better they feel.  They do not work or study while at their healers compound, so of course one can feel a bit better.  No responsibility.  No taking care of kids, no work just play and go through the motions of getting well.

We have treated enough deep addictions to know what is behind most addictions.  There is no place here for booga booga therapy.  It is a crashing malady that requires understanding, empathy and knowing about the deeply embedded roots and imprints roiling the brain.   If there is no deep brain experienced there is no cure. There is no soft way in or out of it.  Pain in and pain must go out.  But only in a systematic, evolutionary way.    No shortcuts.    If the cause is pain and duh! They take pain-killers,  the way out must involve pain; not any pain but exactly the pain that was laid down  years before.  The pain that endured because it remained lodged in the deep brain.  Oh yes, let us  not forget where deep pain lies and how and where it must be approached.    If we stay on the neocortical level how can we ever treat deep-brain processes?   And that is where the imprinted pain remains.  We can dance around it but it is the source, hidden and well sequestered but a force to be dealt with.   Who ever anointed the healers that they could treat addiction?  The same people who told them they could treat migraine and high blood pressure?  We can see addiction so we think we can treat it.   Wrong!  