I was feeling the other night and was left with a unfinished sense that I was not done.   I felt the misery of my life but that was not it; it was the waste, and it was what could have been and what should have been.  Yet all of us in the family were equally victims:  my parents could not love because they were not given any, and they were somehow, unconsciously, also waiting to be loved.    They never knew it, and for the great part of my life I never knew it either.

What it was, was the feeling of great loss, something missing that could never again be duplicated.   It was a damage deeply embedded that remained encased for a lifetime.   It was no love where it could have been the opposite if the parent’s gates could have been open. But it could not be because that would have meant terrible pain and suffering for them; and their whole neurologic system militated against any conscious-awareness.   So my pain was not just what was never there, the love and the holding, but what could have been; and that only happens when we really experience the damage so fully that we finally understand what lack of feelings do and how greatly they damage; and how love would have changed everything. …. a touch, a word of approval, of encouragement:  not so much, just a scintilla,  a hint of it.   That could have changed our lives.  Alas, instead we were in the symbolic struggle to get it; and because what we got was only a symbol, it was never fulfilling.

So after we feel a lot of the pain, another feeling steps in: what a waste.  What we missed, and what we should have had.   Worse, that it is gone and never to return.  It is over and done with.   The damage was cemented into our systems and we are forced to carry it around for a lifetime.  And we are struck with the fact that we will never know what it meant to be a loved child; that is the ultimate tragedy.  All those years of waste; of what we could have had and could have been.  And will never be.  I was a good musician but I never became what I should have been because I never mastered transpositions.  By the time I recaptured myself it was far too late to make up for lost time. I never prepared for college because I never believed I could make it; finally after years of catch-up, I did make it.  But such a waste of all those years of being strangled by my ADD,  unable to learn and believing that something was wrong with my mind.

I come out of a feeling, often now, with the sense of waste; how many years I lost and my struggle to make up for time gone.  We can catch up a lot but not as if we had a normal, loving early life.  We can take a lot of the pain away but not the memories, and not how early neurosis sculpted us into a different human being. We will not become that loved child but we will be open in our systems to be able to be loved as adults. That is a lot.  Even if we are suddenly loved by contrite parents when we are forty it will be nice and even wonderful but it cannot change an unloved early life.  Sadly, that possibility is gone.