There is the obvious: being loved from the start.
There is the less obvious, abstracting the chemical elements that are part of the ability to give and receive love; i.e, oxytocin.  Being loved is the natural way; paradoxically, another way is to feel the lack of love, which seems to normalize so many biochemicals.  I have seen so many patients who are unloved by parents who cannot sustain a loving relationship.

This inability to love is now being recognized in the field  and doctors are prescribing a spray that enhances oxytocin. I have another idea;  let them scream out their agony over not being loved, in Primal Therapy.  What we find is an increase in loving in patients who have relived their pain over the lack of love. It is an odd dialectic that crying out not being loved can help you love, as one turns into the other.  Determined to love one’s wife or kids will help but it does not add the feeling element to the process. And it is the feeling element that is missing, at the start.  And can happen despite our best intentions. The will power needs to be driven by passion and  feelings.  Otherwise it remains a cerebral desire, bereft of feeling.

Those who take pain killers also suppress passion. But, suppose we are on pain-killers permanently; when there is great early pain, there is an equal and opposite reaction to hold down feeling…repression which is constant and obdurate to hold down great agony.  Then we cannot love completely.   And that can begin before we begin in this world.  Clearly, when we remove deeply embedded pain we enhance the ability to love.  We reopen the feeling channels.

Remember, feeling unloved means feeling; repressing it means no feeling.

Let us not look only at oxytocin because what we have found is that normalizing the patient elevates so many biochemicals to normal levels, as we have measured over the years.

We do not dissect the patient into his parts, a kidney, a heart or a liver. We try to approach the human being as a totality and expect changes as a totality, as well.  That is the trouble with Rolfing and Bioenergetics where muscle groups are targeted and worked on to the exclusion of the brain and mind.  Which means all that does not come from the central nervous system but the organs themselves.   Which is how we go awry studying the organ apart from the human being.  And we get changes in the muscle groups and not an organic change. Relaxing tense muscles is not the same as relaxing the whole person.  The tension usually arrives from experiences in life and those sculpt the human being.  I treated one person who had chronic arm muscle tension. He felt in therapy he was chronically holding back, hitting back his father who beat him incessantly.    Beware of the facile, easy answers.  We are not an arm, a liver or blood pressure.  We are humans, and therapy must be of experience.