It used to be LSD that was thought to help us feel, but then we discovered that it flooded the cortex and took away any chance of connection.  Now there is a new one, Oxytocin, which seems to help us share and trust others.  I call it “instant love” because it causes to act for the moment as though we are and were loved.  And friends have wondered if it doesn’t help us open up and feel more?  Indeed it might but like all temporary panaceas its effects are not lasting and it avoids a key point:  what happens to the imprint?  The imprint of unloved which is infused into our entire system?  No drug will take that away and it should not.   Nothing can take away the engraved memory because it is now part of our neurophysiology.  And my point is that we cannot truly feel loved so long as the imprint remains.

    So yes, there are temporary expedients but they remain that.  There is no magic and no real way to deceive our physiology.   If we spent a lifetime with a harridan of a mother and an alcoholic father, that left us totally neglected and unloved, there is no drug that will take that away.   That is like taking away part of our physiology which reflects that lifetime.    If we were abused so that there were changes in our oxytocin, which does happen, as well as permanent changes in our cortisol levels and various hormones, it cannot be undone by a magic infusion of some chemical help, as much as we may find it wonderful.

  You know,  many addicts have found the magic pill; it is called heroin.  Here is how it happens:  some child is in constant pain and because it is an every day of constant neglect and indifference he is not aware of it.  But someone turns him onto heroin and he suddenly feels normal.  He is relaxed and can work and concentrate.  What happened?  He found something that did indeed normalize him. Am I kidding?  I don’t think so since with constant early pain there are basic changes in stress hormone levels and most of all in serotonin, which helps us repress and keep pain down. But with chronic pain the serotonin levels are reduced and we are in a constant malaise, a discomfort, and we have no idea of its origins.  We don’t even know it is called pain.  But then we take a drug, a painkiller that helps us repress and we feel “normal”.   And for that moment we are “normal”.  Just like with oxytocin; we do feel loved and love for the moment. But it quickly passes, and we must not imagine that any drug will take away our history and renew us forever.  That’s called magical thinking, and we have enough of that extent, as it is.  There are those who got into ecstasy which also produced that wonderful feeling of access to feelings and those who took it swear it helped so much, but trust me, it didn’t.  It couldn’t, because until something wipes away our history there is no profound change.  Should I repeat?  Until something eliminates our history, no drug can make a profound change, no matter what you think.  Oh yes, there are changes in thinking and attitudes but no neurophysiologic change.

  But there is a way to feel that we can love again, and that way is the dialectic: to feel totally unloved again; because it is that feeling that constantly drives us and makes us act the way we do.   We are unendingly sweet in order to get some kind of love. But once we feel what happened to us and our feelings we are ready to get on with life and love again.   So what is addiction all about? Trying to achieve the feeling we would have had if we had been loved at the start.  We take drugs every today that enhances that feeling and allows to relax for the moment.  It is not a bad thing; it is necessary.   It is our past that pains us and also liberates us; our history that is freeing because it first has to be acknowledged and felt.  Once done we are finally free.