Do I mean there is a hormone of love?  Yes and with a good birth you will have plenty of this hormone in your system.  Bad birth—low on the ability to give and receive love.   Mothers who had a poor birth history and lack of maternal love from early on, do not have enough milk to give their newborn.  

This hormone is called Oxytocin, (the medicine is known as Cerbetocin) and it not only offers us  the biologic capacity for love but it also softens pain and makes life bearable.   And what can it do about stress?  It can treat stress disorders with something that boosts oxytocin.   In short, it ameliorates pain and suffering.   More, it can counteract anxiety states, which often translates into terror disorder. It can soften stress-related genes. Wonderful. We need to make sure we have it. In the hippocampus it softens potential psychiatric disorders.

There are several studies on the subject; one with rats who had restraint stress. These rats often became depressed. As would humans who were stuck in the canal during birth. Oxytocin had a marked beneficial effect in those animals  who had previous stress. The system rushed in to help out as best if could, as if to say that love is an ideal remedy for hurt and and anxiety.   And “here my friend, is  a dash of love to ease your “suffering.”   The system knows that love is what it is all about. That the antidote to pain is love, and with love all of the natural functions start to normalize.

The problem is that it is not so easy with humans.  We cannot offer hugs and kisses and solve the problem; it is too late.  But there is a way: feel unloved and unfulfilled and open up the closed gates which tried to block too much pain into conscious/awareness. And slowly as we reopen the gates we can feel love again; pain diminishes and the biochemical processes readapt.  Wow, what love can do. The point is even before we are born , stress can change us epigenetically and we grow up thinking we suffer from a genetic affliction because it happened so early.  In other words, we are being shaped long before we go to school and interact with others. Those experiences are important but not as critical as womb life.  The origins of behavior problems exist long before we can behave socially.  And this is very true of mothers who are stressed before and during pregnancy.  They are creating imprints that endure in us and can affect us for a lifetime.

What I think Primals do by lowering pain levels is increasing oxytocin. I believe this is true in those advanced patients who seem far more capable of love.   It seems to change the imprints in the limbic system so that the feeling centers can function properly at last.  So we learn to love from loving parents but the capacity for love is much more epigenetic.  It is inside us, and our systems, when normal, are well prepared for it.   “OK, I am open.  Shove it in and I will tell you when I have had enough.” ENOUGH!