I have been thinking about my discovery almost 50 years ago of primal therapy.  And now I am 91,  Sooooo?  Well, I realize that it has taken me up to ninety years to really understand it and help lead to a cure.  I have stayed on course not because of science which came along decades later, but because of clinical work that kept me on track, as I watched who got well and who didn’t and why?  So I refined and honed and did research, and the results kept me on tract; so long as i did not deviate and listen to dozens of experts tell me what to do.  Such as add hypnosis, rebirthing, body therapy and on and on.  Worse, to rely on drugs to help the brain produce feelings.  I have tried to keep it as biologic and natural as possible.  And now, along comes science and seems to support just about every move and belief we have had.  It did not prove our therapy but confirmed our work.  We did nothing artificial to produce feelings, knowing that it could cause overload, as we then  could not control the upsurge of feelings done with drugs; worse with rebirthing and its ilk.  And even worse those who went to mock primal therapists who claimed to be associated with me, showing my books, sometimes autographed, resulting even with someone like with Steve Job’s brilliance getting taken in, with disastrous results.

We have also done a good deal of research over the years, in England, France and America, with impressive results.  I noticed over the years that we had shrinking cases of cancer among our patients.  We then did a double blind study in  England and France on natural kill cells (part of the immune system that surveys the body for newly developing cancer cells and sets out to kill them).  Newly entering patients were very low in NK cells.  After one year we did a follow-up study and the number of NK cells almost doubled.

The only people impressed were us, since  the cognitive shrinks managed to ignore all of it. The Analysts too and Behaviorists, as well.  They formed an impenetrable  phalanx of indifference; but we soldiered on until today where I have written a definitely crucial article on the cure for neurosis in a scientific peer reviewed journal (coming up soon in "Activitas Nervosa Superior" journal of the World Psychiatric Association).  This has meant that there is a way to do scientific therapy based on scientific principles and achieve astounding results.  That means less  suffering, less addiction, the end of depression and anxiety; the end of suffering for so many.  We have measured this in many labs including the Pulmonary Laboratory at UCLA. None of this is off-the cuff.  We have always insisted on doing the research.  We had a neurologist with us where we studied the brains,  not only of our patients, but also those who took LSD—Acid in the sixties.  There were specific brain changes; and yes there were marked changes in their brains. We knew why they could not sleep nor concentrate.  We have done long-term body temp and blood pressure studies with dramatic changes….leading to my belief that we extend longevity.  For example, we lower body temperature over years by one degree, which means to me a body working less hard and living longer.

And now we know how the pain which I always called The Imprint, gets embedded, endures and leads to serious symptoms.  We have found a way to take patients to their imprints in their brainstems and limbic areas.  The deep pain can be measured and extirpated, not a small thing. So future diseases can be avoided and so a healthy and longer life can be achieved.

We know now that there are traces on the genes called epigenes that tell us of early trauma and how much.  It is measurable.  Above all, we have found a way to undo the damage and reverse history.  We know the route to be traveled.  Not a simple one, but it is do-able.      