Something a little personal here: I think that most diseases that we suffer from, other than the purely heredity ones, Huntington’s Chorea, etc., are due to experience not genetics. I am assuming that something goes wrong during the pregnancy, something imperceptible, and the genetic unfolding is affected.


I am reminded about this because I read a piece by a doctor who is doing Alzheimers research. And I began to think that many of diseases we see that are serious are given the label, “auto-immune disease.” So what does that mean? Part of us attacks another part because it is perceived as a stranger, an intruder. The immune system gathers its resources to fight ourselves; our selves. What self? I think that pain and attack (a mother’s drinking) become a foreign entity, an outsider that is considered a threat. And when we are close to that threat in our therapy we begin to react as if it were a virus. We run a fever, a rise in blood pressure and heart rate and the immune system goes on alert. And it is an alert against what is inside: auto immune. I really think that after all these years of evolution we should not be born with disease because that is anti-evolutionary. Those traits should have died out and maybe they did. What did not die out is the way we adapt to threat; the way we learn to fight or flee it, and how physiologic processes get deviated in the battle. And how those deviations over time lead to disease. The gap between adverse experience in the womb, and disease decades later is so large that it is hard to see the connection.


One way to verify this is through various measurements such as the stress hormone cortisol. Those who were unloved early on have higher levels, and those high levels tell us what happened to us early in our lives; a threat which set off the alarm system. The trouble is that the imprint now makes the alarm system active all of the time; hence higher levels of cortisol all/most of the time. And those higher levels endanger the body and the brain. They ultimately impact the memory system where the imprint is registered, and of course, they impact the heart and brain system making heart attacks and strokes more likely.


The Douglas Mental Health Institute published a study on mother’s love and stress. Mother’s love makes the brain less vulnerable to attack. Love is a painkilling system. Mother’s who touch and caress their babies make them less subject to stress. We already know that. Jens Preussner is doing a lot of the work in Canada. What they are finding is no surprise, the greater the maternal care the less stress in their systems later on. Conversely, the more pain that is felt from early in our lives the less stress we are under. It shows in many dimensions, including all vital signs, stress hormone levels and brain function.


The Preussner work and many others come to the same conclusion: early stress lasts a lifetime. What happens very early on gets imprinted and endures and causes all kinds of havoc and disease o say nothing of behavior problems, unstable relationships, frequent divorce, and so on. The good news is that early love also lasts a lifetime. It is the best tranquilizer and painkiller that exists; that simple parental touch, hug, loving eyes lasts all of your life. Wow! If that happens you will not get addicted to pot, cocaine, heroin or hash. Because what all those drugs do is make up for the lack of love when it should have happened, and when that should have happened is far earlier than we ever imagined. That time is the critical window. Any fulfillment after that biologic time period can only be palliative. A nice warm therapist, they say, is helpful for therapy. Nonsense. It is helpful to make up for a lack of caring you suffered early on. But there is an iron rule to getting better; to visit the critical period again and undo the damage. Anything else is damage control. You can’t fool mother nature and you cannot skip steps in the evolution of psychotherapy. We need to go far back in our own evolution to get well and in no other way.


If I am right that many of the major diseases are epigenetic and not genetic then the molecular changes we see in each disease, from Parkinsons to Alzheimers, from Muscular Dystrophy to Multiple Sclerosis, will begin to normalize after a time of reliving. This will only happen to patients who have had a great deal of therapy and whose systems are ready for deep reliving. When that happens we should begin to see re-establishment of normal cell structure and function. By that I mean better dopamine function, less amyloid plaques, better immune cell function, and so on. The building blocks of our lives which took a detour early on due to adverse experience can begin again to take the proper genetic route. This requires careful research. But is it not worth a try?