We in clinical psychology today are in a strange position. We see people, both in and outside of our practices, suffering from some insidious condition that cannot be seen, tasted, touched, or pinpointed in any single location. The condition is often called mental illness or neurosis. A few question whether the suffering is real, describing the experience as a "trip" to be savored, and terming mental illness a "myth." Others see mental illness as merely a function of distorted thinking, something that will disappear with new thoughts. Among schools of psychotherapy that do admit the existence of mental illness, each one has very different ideas about neurosis and its genesis. Indeed, in no other area of medicine is there such disagreement about the nature of a disease, what its symptoms are, and how it manifests itself, not to mention its causes.

In short, the field of psychotherapy today is nothing less than chaotic. Why?

First, I believe, events that may cause mental illness or neurosis begin so very, very early, and remain so barricaded in unconsciousness, that the notion that early trauma affects how we act at the age of, say, 45, is beyond ordinary imagination. Second, we react with incredible diversity to early trauma, and we may imagine that phobias, migraines, compulsions, obsessions, depression, addictions, etc. must all have different functions. Third, psychologists themselves have blind spots of a function of their own neuroses - they cannot see, cannot bear to see, their patients' deepest pain - and find themselves gladly distracted by symptoms and by ideologies that do not directly address pain.

As a result, the field of psychotherapy may be characterized by a remarkable absence of cohesion, and patients' pain is addressed diffusely at best. Some psychotherapists will consistently prescribe anti-anxiety and antidepressant drugs for varying neuroses, in essence trying to kill patients' pain, but not identifying the pain or where it comes from. Others may manage symptoms through various techniques associated with different schools of psychotherapy: They may have the patient "dissociate from" a symptom in hypnotherapy; cognitively "analyze" it into oblivion; "act -out" the symptom symbolically in gestalt-type therapy; beat it back with mild shock as in conditioning therapy; chalk it up to "faulty beliefs" which simply need to be willfully changed, as in rational-emotive therapy; "control" it in biofeedback therapy; or reroute it in directive daydreaming and imagery therapy.

The myriad approaches in psychotherapy are treatments rather than cures. They all focus on the symptoms of neurosis instead of probing for its cause. It is possible that they all help somewhat; they do not cure, however. They may help control the symptom, not the disease.

The only hope for cohesion, and lasting help for patients, is to address the generating sources of neurosis or mental illness. What and where are these sources? I believe that the conflict between the imprinted Pain of early trauma and its repression is the central contradiction that generates neurotic reactions both internally (physiologically) and externally in the form of behavior. Repression, or the loss of access to feelings and sensations, is an evolved function that allows us to survive unmitigated pain early in life. The pain, however, stays in the body, unavoidably - as unavoidable as the experiences that originally caused the pain. And the pain will perpetually fuel a dislocation of mental and physical functioning to keep itself unfelt, for as long as it remains unfelt.

Therapies that do not address this original, central conflict at the root of neurosis may succeed in reconfiguring a symptom pattern, but cannot eliminate the fundamental illness. Why do therapies and therapists not go deep? Because of our Freudian legacy, which dictates that fooling around in the unconscious is dangerous and must not be done. And it is true that without a proper scientific theory and therapy it can be dangerous; witness the many mock primal therapies damaging patients every day by plunging them into rebirthing and other dangerous ploys. It has taken some thirty years to figure out this theory and therapy so I don’t wonder that many therapists avoid it altogether. But it is essential if we want to put an end to neurosis as we have seen it for one hundred years.