I often write that the simple truth is revolutionary but it is also true  of love, and just maybe they are twin sides of the same coin.  What is true for us humans is the need for love.  I have spent my whole therapeutic life explaining in every way possible the effects of love and no love.  The ultimate revolutionary truth is love; hence the twain can meet.

Why can’t my colleagues in psychology find the truth of love/feelings? What is so difficult about it.  Why in every psychologic theory extant is it missing?  It is like some mystery hidden in a closet that we all ignore, something we must not touch.  And why is it so closely tied to truth?  Maybe it is because the truth is so revolutionary that it means re-creating a whole new approach to psychotherapy reflecting the lack of love.  It means overturning every Behavior/Cognitive therapy that is strewn about everywhere in our field. And when we lift the covers from this abstract theoretical blanket we find deep lacks of love wallowing in a cesspool of pain.  There are groans and moans and we pay no attention to them because we cannot understand their language.

Maybe it is all avoided because we do not fully understand its importance in the psychologic scheme of things.  If a parent pushes his child to succeed and neglects holding him, kissing him and nuzzling him, then of course it will be missing from his life, and above all, from his intellectual theories. How can an unloved child grow up to value it if he has never felt what was missing all of his life?  Until this pain is felt it will be covered over and fancy theories will supplant his ideas about therapy.  This is how a recent Scientific American explains in a recent title piece how (Too Much Praise Promotes Narcissism:  June 17, 2015) We learn how too much praise can make a child self-centered, narcissistic and  arrogant.  This is what is called  in Yiddish, a bubbminsa (spelling), an old wives tale brought down through history to “educate” our offspring.  It is not that Scientific American endorsed it; but they gave it a prominent place in the discourse.  This is shocking from a scientific journal but not surprising because it all comes from the same paradigm the intellect:  uber alles.  Or how about nursing a baby too long makes him addicted to sucking?  Or how about holding a child too long spoils him?  What is missing here?  Clinical experience, but much more personal loving experience, being and giving love, which would dissuade anyone from believing this nonsense.  What they cite are statistical truths which must take a back seat to biologic truths.

Let me cite one axiom:  It has to do with need.  If we allow nursing to go on until the baby no longer needs to, there is no problem.  If we nurse him due to our need to appear hip and progressive, a  great deal is lost and there is addiction in the making.  He is no longer fulfilling his need, he is filling theirs.  Since their need may be a deep pit, the converse of fulfillment of need takes place.  It is too much and produces the same kind of pathology as fulfilling too little.  The real need to both cases is ignored.  We have abrogated the rule of need.  If we hug him every time he cries and never let me cry over a fall, we abort his need to shout out his pain.  Of course, he needs solace but he also needs to express himself.  I have seen this in neophyte therapists who are far too quick to hug and give solace to a person who needs to feel his pain.  It is aborted.  We pay attention to his need and not ours things will usually go right; first, we need to have felt our need: to be bright and understanding, to be empathic and blah blah.  Choose your unfelt need and you will know.  If you need to be famous the child will be pushed to achieve, and love will be nowhere in sight.  He will unconsciously be filling the need that you as a parent lacked when you were  a child.  You need to feel important he will do his damndest to be famous for you. He will be the best athlete in school or the highest level scholar. And you will praise him for exactly what you needed praise for and never got.

Luckily, I had parents who never cared for a moment, not even to know where I went to school.  They had no ambitions for me, and there was nothing I could do to feel loved and approved.  So I never became anything they wanted because they had no ideas or ambitions for me.  I was a pure anxiety case, as a result because there is nothing I could try or be that would make them look at me or talk to me, not the least to say what I  never heard --- that was good what you did.  After all they were Russian peasants who  knew nothing of child-rearing or love except that they should be working in the fields very young.  And to quote this august scientific journal cited above, never praise them or else you will spoil them.  I can’t believe this kind of thinking still exists but psychologic science seems to be in process of dumbing down, reflecting the zeitgeist.  And why is that?  For one key reason---FEELING.  It went missing and not only cannot be found but no one knows it is missing.  Wait a minute, I know where it is.
 