We are all part of nature; the end result of evolution.  Not only are we bound by evolution but are the embodiment of it.  We are evolution; therefore, we must pay attention to it when we practice therapy.  When we ignore  evolution  we always will make a mistake in treatment.  The brainstem was in place before the neo(new)cortex.  And when we plunge patients into the brainstem in rebirthing, it is far too soon and premature in terms of  neurologic evolution.  We unleash primitive material far too soon in therapy; the result is an overload of high valence imprints which suffuse the entire cortex and scatter thoughts, concentration and  focus.  What happens then is the concoction by the patient of weird ideas,  bizarre notions and  non-reality based thoughts as the lower levels feelings drive the cortex to manufacture something that will help suppress those very same feelings.  So heavy feelings cause the production of indigenous tranquilizers—thoughts and ideas —to shut down those very same feelings.  In this case those ideas are the result of repression and is also the agent of repression—the dialectic.  And now we see one key factor in evolution: the ability to fabricate ideas in the service of repression.  And it may well be the one key reason for the evolutionary development of ideas;  to be able to escape the enemy from within…feelings.

  Now let’s  turn it around; the therapy that involves ideas and insights as its key mode.  Cognitive therapy gets stuck in the last stage of evolution and neglects feelings and our history both personal, (ontogenetic), and historical, (phylogenetic).  So on the one hand we  have a therapy that dives into heavy primal material long before we are ready for it, and on the other hand, we remain on one level, in one mode that neglects evolution completely.  Both are  dismissive of evolution and, remember, we are evolution.  And we can perform this neglect when we ignore feelings……too deep too soon; or too late, too late.  We must never be asked in therapy to express  or say our feelings because that is an oxymoron.  There are many pre-verbal feelings that  have no words  Putting words to them  negates those specific feelings.  It uses one level to get to another (words to express feelings); when they are separate and independent.

  So when we anchor the patient in the present and make a slow descent into feelings it will all be natural  and in evolutionary order.  We have to return to the past because that is where feelings first evolved.  Repeat:  the natural order helps us become natural and normal.  We are no longer estranged from our nature; and what that means is that we feel a  commonality with  animals and plants and flowers.  We can again see beauty; that is one effect of a feeling and evolutionary therapy.  That is one effect that cannot be achieved in cognitive/insight therapy.  So long as the feeling band is missing we cannot be at one with nature.  Rebirthing does nothing to re-establish the feeling band.

Feelings do that.

    All this means is that our history lies inside of us; we respond to two worlds at once.  The outer world and the inner one. If there is too much input from our imprinted history we cannot take much from our outer world.  We cannot stand much stimulation.  When there are  imprints from gestation and birth that are lying in wait, trying to get out, moving relentlessly upwards and forwards, putting pressure on the neo-cortex, there  is a tendency to be easily overwhelmed.  Here lies ADD and confusion.    Added to it is addiction, deep, deep addiction in accordance with very deep imprints.  Here lies hysteria and over-reaction.  Here lies impulsive tendencies. Here lies weakened cortical control and  “leaky gates.”  The gates are in an endless battle to keep too much input away so it cannot be overloaded.  And,
 here  lies impatience and intolerance; here lies a mess.