It seems like I am still drowning the fish, so I won’t write too much more on this but the evidence is now overwhelming that very early childhood, and that includes gestation time, changes us for a lifetime.

Here is an example: scientists have found how certain birth defects take place. It turns out that it is not just a birth defect but also experience plus the genetic defect that makes for serious illness. A group of scientists from many universities showed how a genetic tendency plus a period of low oxygen during gestation led to a malformation of the spine (scoliosis). In another related study, they discussed how early trauma led also to later heart problems, as well as impaired kidneys and cleft palate. Low oxygen is often the culprit due to the mother smoking, living at high altitude, diabetes and other diseases. But the point is that the environment working on a gene can produce an affliction, often much later in later in life. Cleft palate certainly looks like a genetic defect but perhaps it isn’t. I call this “envirogenes”; how the environment intersects with genes. Two siblings may have the same early life but differ in their genetic makeup and in their womb-life. What this research shows is nature and nurture working together.

What the researchers on scoliosis found is that having one defective gene allows the womb-milieu to have a great affect on the genetic apparatus. Lack of oxygen working on different genes can produce a different kind of malady; again, later on in life. This is especially true in heart disease. Investigators have found that very early trauma can set up an inflammation in the heart that endures, ending up finally as a heart attack. I have written about low oxygen during womb-life for many years. This is particularly sharpened during the birth trauma where a mother, heavily drugged (and therefore low on oxygen), produces an offspring low on oxygen as well. The problem is that his low state doesn’t just pass away, over a bit of time; it is an imprint that produces an alteration in the system over years. One of those alterations is an inflammation around the heart. Later on, with smoking, drinking, being overweight, lack of exercise, it becomes a full-fledged attack. Did bad diet do it? All of the above did, working on a weak heart muscle. Those with inflamed hearts nearly always have a bad outcome prematurely in later age. And the doctor then wonders what happened to make that appear; and the answer is way back in history; and that is the history the doctor must take, at the outset.

Does bad diet do it? Usually not one factor alone does it. It has to play on a weakened heart, and now we know that this happens so early in our lives as to seem mysterious and unknowable. Yes, we have to die of something, but we shouldn’t have to die before our real time, not on neurotic time. Real time means without excess imprinted trauma early on. And I suggest again that we can get rid of those early traumas in our primal process of reliving. I know a lot about the scientific literature, and I have not seen another way to do it; to do it naturally, without drugs and mechanical intervention. If we take pain out of the system, it seems to me, we won’t die on neurotic time.