In order to understand how pain becomes installed in our system and how we can eradicate it, I am going to address the following questions: how is it that early trauma permanently destabilizes the organism, and that reliving the trauma, even decades later, normalizes it? What are the mechanisms involved and how is it possible that reliving an event changes the brain and biological system? Our decades of research point to significant changes in the brain and biochemistry of our patients. Secondly, a good deal of current research, particularly neurobiological research is strikingly consistent with our hypotheses. I believe that no thorough dynamic psychotherapy can effectively treat a condition without taking into account historical imprints of early traumas. These traumas are often the source of many later symptoms, both physical and psychological. This means that therapies that do not address these deep, generating sources of

.behavior and symptom formation are, at best, palliative, which ensures that the symptom will eventually return and that neurotic behavior remains unchanged.

Here are some of our basic propositions.

l. That the underlying cause of so many adult problems is pain.

2. That this pain stems from very early in life, not the least of which is womb life and birth.

3. That the pain is imprinted in various systems of the organism and the central nervous system.

4. That the pain is coded and stored in key brain systems, particularly the limbic system and brainstem.

5. That the age at which the trauma occurred will determined where in the brain it is stored.

6. That this pain produces an overload of input into the brain system.

7. That the overload produces a neurologic shutdown to keep the pain from frontal cortical awareness.

8. There is then a dislocation of function in many key biologic systems as the energy of the pain is dispersed into various brain structures.

9. That the pain can be registered on three key levels of brain function (brainstem, limbic system, and cortex) or levels of consciousness.

10. That the pain produces a dissociation or disconnection among those levels so that there is no longer fluid access to them.

11. That the function of a proper therapy is to access key imprints on the various brain or consciousness levels.

12. That the suffering component of these traumatic imprints needs to be brought to prefrontal cortical consciousness for awareness and connection.

13. That this connection is the sine qua non of an effective therapy.

14. Once connection occurs the trauma is finally integrated and the blocked energy finally dispersed.

15. That the goal of psychotherapy should be connection by providing access to lower levels of brain function.

16. That Primal Therapy is an experiential therapy that coalesces with current neurologic

research, providing deep access to low-level neurologic processes.

17. This access is accomplished in titrated doses to permit connection and integration, which

creates permanent changes in many biologic parameters, most importantly, in the central nervous system. The kind of changes ranges from altering the amplitude or power relationships between the two hemispheres of the brain, as well as reducing the levels of the stress hormone, cortisol.