YES. A young actor died today. A friend said it was due to too many prescription drugs. And I thought, gee, there are so many ways that we die from lack of love; dying in a car accident after driving drunk. But let’s concentrate on this very sad tale of the actor from Grease who need massive amounts of pain killers.

The drug companies have found molecules, say for serotonin, that we manufacture ourselves; or should I say, “ought to” manufacture ourselves. Prescription drugs mimic what the body and brain produce, all things being normal. But all things are not normal. We are learning that life before birth (the title of my new book) has such hazards and can imprint such devastating pain that we are drained of our normal painkillers before we are even born. Then add to it a birth with heavy anesthetics and then no one around immediately afterwards to hug and kiss the baby. As a bonus, we add to the mix parents who are emotionally indifferent, emotional stones who have no idea about feelings, and we get an actor who overdoses on drugs.

All he is doing is trying to make up for the deficit, the epigenetic deficit. That means the damage done all along the gestational and birth epoch produces a lack of what we absolutely need to feel comfortable in life. A lack of repressive capacity due to “leaky gates.” This results in ADD, the need to drink and take drugs, impulsive behavior. It means constant malaise,discomfort and the inability to sleep properly. Leaky gates sees to that. I hope most of you have read my work and know what leaky gates are. But the gating system that helps keep pain at bay is faulty when overtaxed. It was not meant to withstand assaults during gestation of a mother taking drugs and drinking alcohol. It was not meant to combat a carrying mother who is chronically depressed. It is the same system as in apes. They have different problems but not always what we have.

So the actor who died was only trying to be normal; to have a normal amount of painkillers in his system to get along comfortably in life. And of course, his doctor and friends were warning him of the dangers; but his system only saw “normal and comfort” not the dangers. He overdosed because he was largely “under-dosed” while living in the womb and afterward. No one could see it but we knew it from his behavior. No one stuffs drugs into her system if she doesn’t need it. We need to get away from our abject morality. That is what is immoral; depriving humans of their needs.