I have come to believe that apart from fear and anger the primary key enduring feelings are hopelessness and helplessness. These are two ineffable feelings that are installed long before we have words for them. Yet they drive much of our adult lives; and more, they turn into their opposite, hope and help, and that then drives us. The process by which this happens is neuro-biologic. In the womb there are no behavioral options when the mother is drinking three cups of coffee or four cokes a day; nor when she is hyperexcitable. Her excited state transfers to the baby. The input to the fetus is too much. It is truly hopelessness and he is helpless. All his system can do is deal with the input. Serotonin is summoned but it is often insufficient. The fetus suffers. Then a birth with massive anesthetic that doesn’t allow the fetus to participate in his own exit leaves him with that same feeling. And then to compound it all there are parents who allow the child no freedom and no behavioral options except to obey. Of the epileptics I have seen this has all too often been the case.

So what happens to these feelings? There is a surge of serotonin/endorphins and other neuro-inhibitors that quell the pain. The feelings are dampened but as the child develops some of the energy manages to slip through. So part of the hopeless/helpless feeling traverses vertically to the prefrontal cortex, and also across the corpus callosum to the left frontal area where these painful feelings should be but are too much to acknowledge; so what happens? Hope. And where does that go? Into ideas and, above all, behavior. The hope is embedded into behavior. And it is but a thin sliver that manages to insert itself wherever the possibility of fulfillment exist. If one parent is a bit more human than the other, the hope will go to that parent. If there is no love at all, or if parents inculcate religion into the child, then the hope will go to God who will fulfill all the needs symbolically. There is still the feelings of hopelessness because the fulfillment, so-called, is symbolic.

But it is also more subtle than that. Right now we are treating an obsessive cleaner. She spends hours a day cleaning her house and it never feels right, never feels complete. She only got “love” for helping mother keep a clean house. That is where hopelessness drove the hope. It wasn’t really love, though. Her real needs were not being met—hence the hopelessness. She acted symbolically to get what looked like love. It is biologic; hopelessness drives hope in whatever avenue it takes. When basic needs are not met, it is obligatory and biologic that hopelessness sets in. It does not have to be articulated. Why does hopelessness turn into its opposite? Because hope means survival and hopelessness can be the end of life. Total utter hopelessness as a newborn or infant can mean death. Institutional children do die or else suffer from learning disorders, emotional problems, physical afflictions and do not grow physically to their normal height. Hope points the way to fulfillment of need which spells survival. It guides behavior like an unconscious radar. We are fixated on a warm teacher because there is hope of love. Or later, we are inexorably attached to a partner because of the hope. When someone dashes that hope, watch out! Hope can mean survival so when that is withdrawn the person is in great danger; of the original feeling and its meaning—hopelessness. So, many of us are in a mad dash away from that feeling. Hope is the carrot that leads to “love” and salvation.

There is always the obvious hope such as belief in a deity who will love, protect and watch over us. But most of us hope is more devious. It lies in our very structure. We are alienated and reserved because hope means not causing any trouble nor risking any disapproval. So our hope lies not so much in getting love but in avoiding criticism or disapproval. Or there are those who continually in hope by being kind, generous, meek, undemanding and accommodating. Their personality structure is wound around personality and says with every breath, “love me.” Literally, we are the embodiment of hope. One thing we must do in therapy is help the patient feel what exists in every fiber of her being; get her to first feel the hopelessness by going to the original basic need and hope. Remember, it is lack of fulfillment of need that spells hopelessness. An aside: I believe that it is deep repression of that hopelessness, established very early, that is behind so many serious diseases later on. It is not that hopelessness leads to depression and cancer, as some of the literature has it; it is that repression of it can be fatal.