I just got a letter from Harvard Medical School. They want me to read one of their books, Coping with Anxiety and Phobias. Now why won’t I do that? Because there never is the phrase, “eliminating anxiety.” If all they can offer is coping I can do that on my own. And why can’t they offer “elimination?” Because they still don’t realize how deep and remote the origins of anxiety are. It is a pure vegetative state, mostly around the midline of the body.

Those who write about it could not imagine that sometime in the middle of gestation things happened that imprinted fear or terror. This imprint later becomes anxiety when the person’s gating system is weakened. It is imprinted at a time when the inhibitory forces of serotonin are getting organized but are not yet in full force.

If we do not understand the imprint we will never be led to origins and therefore will never get rid of this dread symptom. We see it in terms of butterflies in the stomach, cramps, pressure on the chest, breathing difficulties; all nonverbal elements that do not succumb to verbal therapies. It takes route when the lower brain centers and the brainstem are the highest level of brain function operating at the time. And, as I note, a brainstem imprint is a brainstem symptom—colitis, ulcers, breathing problems.

The answer to this is to go back in time to the brain that handled it, in the first place. Feel the terror piece by piece, and then we should not suffer any more. In my article and book on Life Before Birth, I cite a number of research studies that indicate that the physiologic status of the mother is usually paralleled by the fetus. High stress hormones in the mother will also be high in the fetus/baby. The baby gets a send-off with a predilection for anxiety just after birth. It may not show up for years as a consciously/aware symptom, but the groundwork is there from the start.

To eradicate anxiety we need a theory and therapy that understands remote origins, not the least of which is during gestation and birth, and then we need a therapeutic setting with no outside distractions so that the person can travel back in time through the vehicle of feelings. It is the factor of resonance that steers us to the right place and right time. Conventional therapists will not see nor understand it until they have a darkened silent therapy room where no great amount of verbiage can take place. In short, the patient needs to be inside herself, with the inhibitory neocortex receding so that access can be achieved.

If one does not believe in the remote past imprint then one would not devise a therapy to accommodate that goal. So much of current therapy involves verbosity ad nauseum that getting to feelings is impossible just in the structure of the therapy room.

And now the trend for anxiety cases is medication and more and different medication. And where do these medications work? Down low in the brain on the vigilance and feeling centers. That should tell us something. That anxiety results from very early trauma and is not something existential. Memory is medicine. Let us never abandon that truth.

A current situation, someone refuses to honor an application, sets off inordinate anxiety. Why? The situation resonated with very early terror, which is dredged up and inserts itself into the person’s current situation. Anxiety is the lower level aspect, the primal aspect, of the overall feeling of, “I can’t get through … to you.” It is current, resonates with parents whom could not be reached emotionally, and finally to the birth where the baby could not get through (was blocked). The radical part of this is, “I can’t get through.” That is the base, the first-line component. Later on, we add whatever circumstances compounds the feeling … to you. It gets to be anxiety when the gating system is inadequate to stem the access to lower brain levels. It is very much like need. At first there is pure need for love, for touching and holding, for caressing and warmth. When that is deprived very early on the need becomes the “need for.” It can be the need for drugs or food or gambling. But that is derivative of basic need; so when we treat these afflictions we must keep in mind that it is at bottom a real need we are dealing with.