They arrested a killer a while ago. His uncle said he came back from Iraq hearing voices that told him to kill. So let’s look at this. It would help again if we understand the three levels of consciousness. Here was a troubled kid who went to Iraq and got overwhelmed. Without the war he may have made it but the war was the last straw. It was too much. His early pain was rising; a lot of his anger and fury from early on in his life which already made him unstable. That pain and anger began to rise after Iraq which filled him with rage;; but he did not feel the rage instead he heard voices telling him to kill. Those were the upper level translations of his deep-lying rage. And it turns out that when one hears voices there is actually electrical activity in his brain as if he actually were hearing voices. He was listening to his feelings given voice and he obeyed what they told him. He obeyed because his feelings were commanding him as they do most of us. The difference with us is that we don’t hear voices, we just act. In psychotic killers there is an intervening variable.
The voices are subconscious emanating from deep rage that is out of control. In neurosis we feel on the verge of something but we contain it because our defense system is working partially. And we lose our temper but we do not kill. There is enough defense and gating and also there may be less first line rageful imprints at work.
The problem is that this man was required to kill in Iraq. He was given permission and it must have felt a relief. But it provided a channel for murder. The whole experience was too much for an already damaged individual. But now he had a socially institutionalized approval for a monstrous deed, so he needed not see it as monstrous. And indeed most soldiers simply say about killing, “I have a job to do and I do it.” It is not killing in anger, which would be logical; rather,, it is murder as a job. Killing is a job description just like any other job. So today there is an uproar in the media about our solders urinating on killed Taliban troops. It is not the killing that outrages the media but the urination. When put on a moral scale it seems to me that murder might be a tiny bit more monstrous than urinating. But you see society has sanctioned killing not urination. So will these 3 dead bodies make us safer? You decide. Don’t forget that our soldiers were put in harm’s way so that foreigners were trying to kill them. Of course, they are angry and act-out.

When you hear voices it is not you who are killing; you are just following orders, like the Nazis. And you are not guilty. This poor killer had no idea where those voices came from. But he had to obey. Feelings told him what to do just like with us so-called normals.