We have all heard the complaint; “Stop whining. Get over it. It’s just in your head”. Well, that latter phrase is just not true. Someone who is suffering emotional pain, “She hurt my feelings. He ignored me”, is using the same lower brain pathways as with physical pain. It is not just in the head but also in the deep brain processes that affect many organs of the body. Those pathways do not distinguish between physical and emotional pain. Hurt is hurt. And it hurts the same whether a smack on the face or an insult of rejection. Unfortunately, we cannot just “get over it” as some implore. Or just change our attitude, because those admonitions are fighting deep brain processes.

What some may mean in “get over it,” and change your attitude, is that emotional hurt is not really physical; it is just somewhere in space without physiologic effects. All late research reports that it is. A slight insult may set off earlier ones so that the reaction may be inordinate and out of keeping with the importance of the insult. The way to get over it is to not accept reassurance or means of distraction from others, and feel the root pain that lies just under that feeling that produced the attitude, in the first place. Too often current therapy tries to change ideas and attitudes without changing the underlying feeling; the feeling that gives rise to the attitude. “It’s all in your head.” Where else would it be? What most mean by that phrase is that it is in your imagination which you can change. Ah no! It is lodged deep in the brain where psychologic access is impenetrable. And until those feelings are addressed and integrated we cannot get “over it.”

The problem is that there are antecedents to an attitude. Even when the feeling is deeply sequestered, its raw emotional content continues to drive attitudes. Thus someone who is pro-war may have deep rage inside. Or those who are fearful see danger everywhere. They cannot just get over it. None of this may be conscious. Consciousness is what is required for integration yet so many therapies function in suppressing it, mostly because it means being aware of one’s sequestered pain. Consciousness, in one respect, is the main force for integration and resolution. It means having access to various separated neural functions.

Think about it; pain has so many diverse dimensions. We have to be aware of it so the neocortex is involved. There are feelings involved so that the cingulate and other limbic/feeling structures are included. And there is the force or valence/intensity of the pain, which involves the brainstem and some limbic areas. All go into making the pain experience; and to treat only one dimension, the ideational, is to leave the other two very busy, gnawing away at the physical system. All of this is going on unconsciously.

Pain is perceived as less intense if there are distractions going on. This help explains EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing), which helps through suggestion to make the deep feeling seem “alienated” (their word). It means alienating oneself from one’s feelings. Usually that is a definition of one kind of neurosis, not one of health. It is well known now that there are descending pathways from the top-level cortex to the limbic/feeling areas that help repress feelings and keep them unconscious. Those nerve pathways help control feelings so that they do not emerge and rise to the cortical level. They are partly responsible for dissociation. Similar ascending pathways are used to translate emotional pain/feelings to the top-level cortex to make us aware.