Let me explain the cost of neurosis. A man in my neighborhood drinks a lot. Last week he rolled his car and he got hurt and he hurt the people he hit. All because he was constantly trying to kill his pain; a pain he never recognized. Then the circus begins. The adjuster comes out and spends hours figuring out the damage to both cars. He files a report that he then sends to the head office, which goes over it and relays it to the car repair shop and then gets in touch with the car rental company to get him a car while he waits.

Then he is in the hospital to fix a broken arm and the others are in hospital for whiplash. Doctors and nurses and medicine after medicine. He can’t work so he needs a replacement at his job; a call for someone else. Then comes the lawsuit with experts for both sides, and finally the court date with doctors and lawyers testifying. The judge has to deliberate and file a conclusion, which is then sent to both parties. There is another bill for repair for the other car, which he refuses to pay; so another small claims court meeting to again assess the damage. More trips to court and more lawyers. And then months later the cars are repaired and he has gone back to drinking. Think of the personnel and time wasted in all that; all because he needed to kill his pain and got drunk. All the time devoted to this nonsense. And worse, there is often death involved as the drunk has so little control. He goes to court over and over and gets off, gets no treatment, and is ready for the next death. The jails are so full of others killing their pain; the majority in prison are in for drug offenses. How about we take out the pain and stop the drug abuse and the years in prisons for so many people; men and women who have to leave their families to be locked up. And for what? Still in pain and still in need of painkillers, alcohol, heroin, tranqs and all the rest.

Wouldn’t it be a great saver of life, limb, and money to get the kind of therapy that removes the pain from the system so that he does not have to take painkillers to make it through the day? It is a lot less hassle and a lot cheaper. Now multiply this by millions or thousands every day with the same complications. Society is wasting half its time dealing with the effects of killing pain. There has to be a better way. We have the answer; now the right people have to ask the right question.