Don’t take this as gospel but I want to share my observations.  What I see of death and dying is that different personalities die of different diseases or for different reasons. Those who were always hyperactive, who never stopped, who worked around the clock and could not sit still will die of a stroke.  The imprint here is first line, that is, either during gestation, around birth or just after.  It affects the brainstem terror, dealing with life-and-death, and constantly galvanizes the system into activity. That never stops; so long as the imprint is unchanged it goes on for a lifetime.  The brainstem sends impulses up to the top cortex; the brain then manufactures all kinds of projects and plans to rationalize the imprint. And, it nearly always dictates hypersexuality.  If we want to know about infidelity, look here too.  The terror center of the brainstem, the locus ceruleus, is no doubt one of the culprits here.  It is busy because traumas during gestation and around birth are nearly always a matter of survival.  That memory endures.  
 
    Why don’t they die of cancer?  Because repression is faulty.  Those who die of cancer are also first-line blockers whose repression is effective even in the womb.  The inhibitory serotonin/endorphin systems work well, too well!  These people don’t have as many outlets as they should.  Also, the nature of the birth trauma usually enhances repression; massive anesthesia given to the mother which intrudes into the baby’s system. Then we have the compounding, very repressive parents, disciplinarians who smother the child and her feelings.  Prescription cancer.  Look around and see who dies and of what.  Now, those who squelch their feelings put enormous pressure on the right hemisphere  and a right side stroke can be the result.  Those who live in their heads, intellectuals and very religious individuals, have a good deal of right side feelings whose energy travels to the left ideational side; the result, a left side stroke.  As I said, this is not gospel.  