It happened again recently and it will happen again in the future. Someone goes crazy and fires into a crowd, killing many. And now the media begins their handwringing frenzy. We need to reflect on what makes this happen. I have already reflected so let me add to what kinds of things make it happen.

First of all, these individuals don’t just “go crazy.” They have been going crazy since birth and before. So what does that mean? It means there was tremendous pain during womb-life, perhaps a smoking/drinking manic mother that loosened the gates. Then a terrible birth and no love from anyone afterward. The gates are flooded with pain and cannot hold it back. What is worse, the first-line deeply embedded pain is surging through at all times so that eventually the first line becomes the third line. There is now no cortical ability to discern reality; only internal reality is at the fore-front; all the hurts, neglect, insults, beatings and indifference are in the fore. The person has a far-away look about them as they are living totally in the past, not the here-and-now. They therefore seem dazed and unresponsive.

Here they are vulnerable to the zeitgeist, the latent ambiance, that will channel their rage and their pain. It is like a giant cloud that overhangs their world and forces them to think and act in certain ways. Decades ago it was to kill the communists where conspiring against them. So my psychotics would nail up the doors and put foil on their heads to block the communist conspiracy. Trouble was, they were already inside and there was no defense against them, “them” meaning the menace and the danger. It was imprinted and inescapable.

Today we make the danger physical, the liberals; they have to be “stopped.” So when congresswoman Giffords appears, and is known in the press as a liberal, hence, danger, she must be stopped, and everyone else around her. Enter the gunman who is trying to do everything he can to get rid of the dangers that plague him. If only he knew it was all inside.
But no, Sarah Palin has drawn crosshairs on gifford’s face in the press, an open invitation to shoot her where she stands. She can claim they were not gun crosshairs but the damage is done. The zeitgeist did not make the killer crazy and did not force him to take up the gun, but the ambiance channeled it all for him. The right wing denies it because they too are creatures of the zeitgeist and help make it real and widespread. They really believe that liberals are the enemy; not fellow-Americans who simply disagree or have a different view. They are the enemy. Why? Because any differing idea or ideology threatens their defense system, fragile as it is.

These people need an enemy to justify their fear, terror and rage. Otherwise, where would it go? Would they implode? They would be bereft, bereft of any defense or outlet. Now they have a socially institutionalized belief system that they can slip into that justifies everything they believe. But please don’t challenge it; don’t question their notion or perception of reality, cause it ain’t reality. It is a socially institutionalize belief system. An artificially constructed reality that keeps their feelings in place and justified.

Why are they right-wing? Because of all their pain that drove them away from feelings and made feelings and kind-hearts an anathema. Because they cannot see reality and don’t want anyone else to. All delusions love company; that is why cults work and why it is so dangerous to leave the cult—to have a new idea about the world. I have seen it and treated those who were in cults. They do not tolerate dissent.

I never remember growing up with this kind of mass phenomenon. A guy killed someone for personal reasons. Now he has a social rationale for it all. He can feel guilty with a clear conscience. It becomes really dangerous when many join in on the delusion; they reinforce each other and reify the beliefs and make them impenetrable.