A few years ago a man came to attend our training. He did not complete it, and instead went on and spent a lot of his energy trying to put down our therapy and theory. In short, instead of feeling his feeling of "I am a loser and a failure", we became the failure, we are the failure, not him. And he has to continue to do it, wasting much of his life, because that feeling of being a failure is close behind creeping up on him. Otherwise why spend months doing this? This is an act-out pure, denying and running from the feeling of being a loser who failed at a training where we are most lenient and give everyone as much time as they need. And the obsessiveness of anyone who goes on and on in the act-out means that the denied feeling is driving him.


This should inform us of others who act-out; we cannot dissuade them with arguments because that is not why they act-out. They are being driven by their unconscious and arguments are far too weak to change them. That is why cognitive approaches can never make headway on this problem. This man failed because he entered training stating that he already knew about this therapy; he could not learn because he could never admit that he really didn't know. He already had such a stake in being smart that he acted dumb and finally failed. None of this will stop him until he feels, which he will not do because he cannot admit he failed, that he was not so smart, after all. Any obsessive is being driven by his unconscious, and any argument to sway them will mean nothing. That is why the sex criminals who go to anger management or sex education are going to get nowhere. Again, they are not driven by intellect; intellect is not in the driver's seat. Their hidden feelings are. We can amass idea after idea, proof after proof, and people will amass counter-arguments to protect them against their own feelings. Now we know why in those endless TV debates no one ever says, “you are right and I am wrong. “ They go on with the same ideas year after year and they never change. So don’t think your good arguments will change him. They won’t. He will immediately plunge in to find more people who don’t like us and will search out more help to put us down because it has to be us the failure, not him. It is not a false idea he is holding; it is his whole life at stake; that he never succeeded as far as he thought he should.


This is also a lesson in dialectics on which a lot of my therapy is based; the interpenetration of opposites; that is, how things turn into their opposite. Acting smart makes you dumb, acting courageous keeps you fearful, etc. And in our therapy acting afraid makes us courageous and feeling dumb makes us smart. Feeling dead makes us come alive because we are feeling at last. Feeling pain makes it go away; feeling unloved finally allows us to be loved and to take in love. You get the idea; so long as we do not feel our pain it stays and wreaks havoc with our system. When we feel it it stops and we live longer, of that I am certain. One reason is that we reduce the stress hormone levels and that may mean longer telomeres which portend of a longer life. It seems to me that all unfeeling people, scientists too, need to put down a feeling therapy to keep themselves content with their lives, their philosophy and their therapy. Arguments won't do much to change them but feelings will. Alas, they denigrate feelings, to their detriment, to their humanity.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


I wrote the above in response to the following email:
"Art,

I hope you won't be upset that I sided with the man I defended you from a little bit. I find its good to confuse crazy people a bit to keep them from having a clear target. I find that creative views are not their strong point. I do think you may have exaggerated a bit in your claims but I suspect in general you are right on target. However I needed ammunition from Bruce to pour in against this "Debunking Primal Therapy" site, of which he had made me aware. Attacking the guy's position first allowed Bruce to gauge his response to me (and yes I hit a nerve somewhere there in the guy he responded and showed his condescending colors), this in turn will help guide Bruce's next move. The game is marketing and politics and between us I think we can make this "debunker" rue the day he started and in any case increase traffic to your website.

The guy accused me of not reading his blog then proceeded to say I was planning to do primal therapy without a "license" boy did that hope a shot for me to take. Along the lines of making a comparison of other "therapies" against Primal Therapy our attack is very much strengthened. I am additionally giving you the spot light as noble victims. I think I like this attacker he has given us more ammunition than we know what to do with, ha.

I even gave him another area of attack, which is myself. He can waste some of his banter and vitriolic out pourings of elitism on me, go ahead, ha.

Bruce and Peter are important allies for your cause and I try to see to any degree I can their positions even though I may differ somewhat. Like a charging bull, this guy can be distracted and misdirected and this takes away some of his steam.

I also like to play "good cop/ bad cop" with guys like this. I am confronting him and not in a very pc manner. This opens the door for Bruce to and Peter to be "nice guys" agreeing where they can with him and getting him to see new angles. This will make Bruce and Peter look great to those reading their posts, but allow me to make the stinging remarks that some may agree with and give him further troubles about. Lost in the chatter and confounded in getting out a clear message he may retreat for while or find it not worth his time, but this guy will regroup many times if I have understood his drive well. He seems a third liner to me, someone fled to his head, they get upset and they can be dogged as certain emotional skills on the second line are not well developed or connected. (Just my opinion, if I am wrong let me know.) First line pressure combined with third line planning and attack are things that remind me of wolves on the attack. They are one pointed and linear in their attack so distractions are hard for them to cope with if they are presented with what they experience as a threat. I had a psyche teacher and in my argument with him years ago about Primal Therapy I boxed him in until he let out a screech totally out of context his first line pressure exploding in a cry, he was a third liner in my opinion as well. He was fair and gave me an A in the class but the rest of the young folks saw and noted a "power struggle" between us, he had lost some of his air of authority. I retreated and we never discussed it much again, but I think he respected my position and the fact that instead of pushing it further I laid down my arguments and found entertainment and insight in what he said on other subjects giving him full credit.

I am writing a lot to let you see how I operate. This will allow you to see the contexts from which my view points arise and how I adapt them to fit the situation.

Always be frank with me and tell me when you disagree or wish me to change tactics. I will strive to comply. Obviously I have a good load of first line pressure myself but I try to keep it at bay or drain its force a bit (yes I know, a bit dangerous so I do that as much as possible as a result of third and second line feeling contexts).

When he presents horror stories which are available with any attempts at therapy, I have a personal come back that shows that his support of main line psychology is in fact oppressive. My life was pretty much cast in the trash by meddling social workers and main line but crazy psychologists who ran the Pine Rest facility in Grand Rapids. I will always be your ally Art, you were a voice of reason in a world that in my mind had "gone mad". They pretty much embittered me against the entire profession. They were a "Christian" facility and even pushed their particular brand of Christianity on us and had us all stand up feeling embarrassed in a Church we were made to go to in order to give praise to some "selfless" saint who served in their facility (which was more like a jail) and who was a member of that Church. The less training the "helpers" had the better we kids liked them and in fact the saner they seemed to be.


Any time you like just tell me "say this to this person" and I will do it. This will really throw them off guard as they will get a left hook from a pro expecting a more clumsy right from myself. How do you attack someone who seems to have flashes of highly educated arguments? Again it will throw him off guard, and pave the way for others to take advantage of any weaknesses in logic etc. that he might show as a result of too much pressure from the first line.

We will attack his positions from many sides and with many degrees, confuse him with it, pull him into agreements that will undo his conclusions in the end, until he makes mistakes that show people how crazy his attacks on you actually are.


I am not an unkind person but people like this stand in the way of others finding help and encourage suppressive forces in psychology that end up hurting people as they did me, when I was young and unable to defend myself well.


I hope this was useful to you, I am sorry that I can't write like Bruce or you can. I am just trying to help. Your France really paints well I love her one painting and will be looking for the others. I have been distracted by this attacker ever since Bruce informed me of this guy.


Have a really nice day guys