  Here is something I could have written; actually I did, only not here:  “In a study published online in Genome Research, researchers have for the first time shown that the environment experienced in the womb defines the newborn epigenetic profile.” (http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/07/120715193843.htm). It goes on to say that there are chemical modifications to our DNA that has implications for later life.  What they mean is that traumatic experience during womb-life can modify DNA expression so as to change who we are and what we suffer from years later.

  I have written about this process, called Methylation, in my Life Before Birth.  So when we look to answers for cancer, diabetes and heart disease we had better check  out womb-life.  I already said it but it sounds more authoritative when it comes from professional researchers and professors.

  In this study they looked at twins and their DNA Methylation.  They looked at umbilicord tissue, cord blood and the placentas of newborn twins.  They found that even in identical twins there are great differences in these profiles.  And here is their important conclusion:  “This must be due to events that happened in the womb to one twin and not the other.”  So although twins share a womb, what happens to each of them can be quite  different.  That is why when they do twin studies and omit womb-life, they are missing key elements of the puzzle.  Because they differ even in the womb their later “genetic” profile may be quite different; therefore what diseases they get and how long they live can also be different.  And, no surprise, the authors believe that womb-life events may have a more profound effect than previously thought.  They claim that this discovery is a powerful tool for managing future health and modifying risk.  So as my mother used to say, “Columbus discovered America.”  Their research is critical, however, to the ongoing frame of reference for understanding why we get sick.

  The lead author believes we can modify risk through dietary intervention and other environmental approaches.  He does not say what is crucial:  how about we  intervene during womb-life and make it salubrious and salutary?  How about we make womb-life a great place to be?
We can do it through education and we can also do it by reliving those adverse womb events and changing them to non-deleterious events.

  I think we can reverse methylation, and I have written about it in my latest book. At least we can remove some of its embedded trauma.  That, in my opinion, is what reliving key traumas do, and is why we can prevent future diseases or at least modify their harm.  We can unlock the trauma from  its hiding place and liberate its energy so it does not more harm.  Remember the oath all  doctors take?  First do no harm.