What exactly brings on the overwhelming feeling of depression, which lasts anywhere from hours to days, I don’t know. It seems to be part of the theme of my depression that I can’t control when it comes on. It then feels like a big black feeling-less hole I fall into and can not get out of. I feel completely empty, hopeless, and helpless. I feel it is my fault I am in this place and can’t get out of it. I blame myself for being there. It’s a place that almost seems unreal when I’m not in it, like I am making it up, like I’m lying about it. It’s a place that feels very gloomy and doomed. It’s a place where I feel suicidal, where I dream a suicidal dream. There used to be times when I couldn’t move when got in this place. I feel very different from everybody else, apart, disconnected and removed. My face turns into a mask, the corners of my mouth droop and smiling seems as foreign to me as laughing at a funeral.

Feeling alone and isolated is a big part of my depression. I currently have dropped so deeply into this place that it’s hard to write about it. I am pregnant with my first child, who is due to be born in three months, and I am overwhelmed by fear how my depression, loneliness and isolation is going to affect his life. A lot of my pain is rooted in early infancy (separation from mother for 5 weeks after birth) and I am worried about how this early pain is going to affect my mothering abilities. I am very concerned about postpartum depression, because I know that holding my own child in my arms when he is born and welcoming him into this world is going to trigger my pain of not having been held and not having been welcomed into this world. The pain in this is so huge that I can only touch on it in little pieces. I always thought I would have one gigantic Primal that would just magically clear everything away, but this therapy a slow process in my case. The books I read that made me start this therapy talk a lot about feeling “the pain”. I think I forgot that feeling pain does hurt and even now thirty years later I can only take so much of it.

Why feel then if it does hurt? I feel closer to myself when I feel the pain. I am hidden in my pain and the only way to uncover me is to uncover my pain.

How has therapy helped me with my depression? First of all, it helped me identify that I am/get depressed. Before, I was walking around not knowing what was going on with me. There is a certain comfort in knowing. The most important thing I discovered for me is that if I can cry the depression lifts, sooner or later depending on how deep I have dropped into it. The way to the tears, though, is not always straightforward and until I can cry there is suffering.

Feeling my pain has made room for new, good feelings, which are as rewarding as the road to them is difficult. An example of that is my thirtieth birthday, which occurred not too long ago. Months before I started to agonize over what to do with that day, feeling more and more alone as the day approached. I ended up not doing anything, being too overwhelmed by the feeling and spent a good deal of my birthday crying in that loneliness. My husband and I agreed that we would go out to dinner, just the two of us. He ended up surprising me with a very, very special evening. The joy, happiness and completeness I felt that evening was nothing I had ever experienced before and I told him that every tear I cried was worth the happiness of evening. His gift to me was a feeling that I had never felt before and I treasure that feeling more than anything. Depression has robbed me of the good things life has to offer. Feeling pain is a way to make room for them.

The other big thing is that I can still feel suicidal but it’s not something I would want to act on. The thought of suicide is at the bottom of my depression and used to be a fantasy that would allow me to fill its emptiness. It used to be my dream of a way out. I now know that my way out is through feelings however twisted and difficult they can get sometimes.