Over the years, I have cited one study after another showing how loving parents produce healthier children in every way. I have also cited a good deal of our work noting how we have normalized stress hormones, serotonin, immune function, and vital functions (vital signs: all summed up in my book Primal Healing). There is also a good deal of evidence about how love changes animals and also makes them better suited to life. The NY Times (“The Spirit of Sisterhood” April 24, 2012) has discussed this.

Let’s look at some of the recent evidence. A growing number of studies suggest one potential mechanism linking stress and adversity in childhood and in the womb to cellular aging, disease, and mortality in humans: telomere erosion (Drury, et al., 2011; Entringer, et al., 2011; Epel, et al., 2004; Wikgren, et al., 2012). In the first prospective-longitudinal study with repeated telomere measurements in children while they experienced stress, Idan Shalev and his colleagues (Shalev, et al., 2012) tested the hypothesis that childhood violence exposure would accelerate telomere erosion from age 5 to age 10 years. “We examined telomere erosion in relation to children's exposure to violence, a salient early-life stressor, which has known long-term consequences for well-being and is a major public-health and social-welfare problem.” Violence was assessed as exposure to maternal domestic violence, frequent bullying victimization and physical maltreatment by an adult. Participants were children recruited from the Environmental-Risk Longitudinal Twin Study, a nationally representative 1994–1995 birth cohort. Each child's mean relative telomere length was measured simultaneously in baseline and follow-up DNA samples (using the ratio of telomere repeat copy numbers to single-copy gene numbers).

Compared with their counterparts, the children who experienced two or more kinds of violence exposure showed significantly more telomere erosion between the age-5 baseline and age-10, even after adjusting for sex, socioeconomic status and body mass index. “This finding provides support for a mechanism linking cumulative childhood stress to telomere maintenance, observed already at a young age, with potential impact for life-long health.”

So here again, if you’re subject to violence you may live less long. But don’t forget the violence done to you in the womb when mother smokes or drinks, or is very anxious--that trauma occurs so early that it cannot be observed. Yet it happens when the whole neurobiologic system is just being organized, and it severely impacts the baby. The trauma is there, and can be implied through biologic measurements that I have discussed previously in my works, and in shorter telomeres in later life (Entringer, et al., 2011). One measurement, cortisol/stress hormone levels, rise, indicating the baby has suffered and is suffering inside. No one seems to notice, least of all, the baby/child/adult. But telomeres tell us: look out, there is misery there. And when there is overt suffering, as in violent homes, the telomeres shorten, resulting in our being on earth for a much shorter time. We sometimes can say, “I was hit every day after school,” but it is hard to say, “I was ignored every day after school.” The punishment and hurt is still there.

Unloving homes may also be terribly traumatic with effects on the telomeres. One way we know is that our entering patients, nearly all, begin therapy with high stress levels. And those levels, as shown in our vital sign and cortisol studies, move toward normal after our therapy. And we do know that chronically high levels of cortisol indicate possible telomere shortening. These patients are not all aware of their suffering when they start therapy. But the read-out screams suffering.

In almost every mammal there is the expression of love in one way or another. Chimps groom each other, while elephants rub trunks. Monkeys hug and kiss each other. There is something about touching and rubbing that shows love in almost every species. We need to translate that to humans who think that saying “I love you” is enough. It is not. It comes from the top and is not physical. If you could groom your child, rub his head and his back and cuddle him every morning—that is love and it has a direct physical effect. It is saying, “I am giving you life and I will help you be healthy and live a long time.” And, Oh yes, I will lengthen your telomeres. It is not hard to do, that rubbing and hugging, yet if we do it every day with the children we will rear great kids. It is that easy. You leave yourself 10 minutes very morning to brush your teeth and do your hair; take another 10 minutes and cuddle and kiss. That is all you need to do. Just kiss and hug and then watch. And that is very hard to do with a child who was unwanted; who was in the way and came at an inconvenient time. Faking it won’t do it. It is a feeling we are after. And sometimes resentment is there first and foremost; the child never had chance, unwanted from the start. And he will be resented for getting born.

It may seem like magic, all this, but it is not. The magic is love. It begins by fulfilling each and every need; in the womb it means a healthy life, no drugs, and proper nutrients. At birth, it means a natural one with no anesthetics if possible, with holding the baby immediately close to mother’s body, in a warm, calm environment. And, of course, to avoid cesarean whenever possible. I list what happens in my new book, Life Before Birth, when a good birth does not happen.

From then on, it means touch and hugs, listening to the child’s moods and understanding and reacting to them: I am just trying to list what I never got that made me a wreck in childhood to suss out what the needs are. It means caring and being interested in the child; not being distracted and occupied elsewhere in your mind. Being close to the child emotionally means he will be able to be close to others without fear. He won’t hang back and hide behind mother’s skirt in the presence of strangers. A loved child doesn’t do that. I have had loved children around me. They are always a joy. I can pick out in a group of children which child has been loved and had a good birth. I have done it before with success. They are different; they are normal. They act normal, look normal and their bodies are normal. Don’t forget the body in the talk about normalcy. That is what any psychotherapy should aim for. It is what we all want and need.

What we do not want is a therapist setting up some arbitrary goal of normality, and then guiding us toward it, so that we end up leading his life, his wants and desires, and not ours. It is our own body and brain that dictates a goal, if needed at all, and leads us to it. If we are normal we will lead a normal life. If we concentrate on behavior alone we will never be well. We must focus on the whole system that gives rise to that behavior. We can go to therapy and try to learn to act normal, and then we die prematurely from early lack of love. Remember, it is an act. If you were not loved early on it has to be an act. We do not grow out of our childhood; we only grow away from it.

Most mammals have pals or love objects that they hang with. It gives them strength to deal with life. Mice who have pals give birth to more offspring. They are giving life. A lioness will suckle another mother’s baby…giving love and life. A close friend is soothing and calming.

The critical period for when to be loved is closed early in life and that is that. Daddy leaves home soon after his baby is born, comes back years later and wants to make up for lost time with his kids. He can’t. It is too late. It helps a bit but does not change anything. It softens some of the blow and prevents serious compounding of the imprint. The kid still feels unwanted and unloved…it is an immutable imprint. We cannot erase history, but let me tell you what we can do about it….

It seems crazy but I believe it to be true. You cannot change your telomeres and stress hormones by an act of will; it changes as part of a systemic change. But in a session, if you feel unloved within that early timeframe, you can normalize and live longer; and I believe the telomeres will not shorten as fast. Let me repeat: if you can go back in time to feel fully unloved when the imprint was laid down you will live longer. If you cannot do that and want to get on with life, life will bite you back and make you die sooner. I think that is a biologic law. You have to feel your need again; it is biologic.

When we get love very early in life it endures for a lifetime; it becomes the world’s best painkiller. And it avoids the need for later painkillers and tranquilizers. Love loads us up for a very long time with natural anti-pain medication. And when it was not there, we play catch-up all of our lives, taking pills to ease the pain over the love we never got. A love we never knew existed. So what to do? It is so easy to love a child from the day she is born; and that is pure prevention for a lifetime. It ensures health and longevity. Who can ask for more?



Drury, S.S., Theall, K.P., Gleason, M.M., Smyke, A.T., Devivo, I., Wong, J.Y.Y., Fox, N.A., Zeanah, C.H. and Nelson, C.A. (2011, epub). Telomere length and early severe social deprivation: Linking early adversity and cellular aging. Molecular Psychiatry, 1-9.

Entringer, S., Epel, E.S., Kumsta, R., Lin, J., Hellhammer, D.H., Blackburn, E.H., Wüst, S., and Wadhwa, P.D., et al. (2011) Stress exposure in intrauterine life is associated with shorter telomere length in young adulthood. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 108:33, E513-E518.

Epel, E.S., Blackburn, E.H., Lin, J., Dhabhar, F.S., Adler, N.E., Morrow, J.D. and Cawthon, R.M. (2004) Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101(49):17312–17315.

Shalev, I., Moffitt, T.E., Sugden, K., Williams, B., Houts, R.M., Danese, A., Mill, J., Arseneault, L. and Caspi, A. (2012) Exposure to violence during childhood is associated with telomere erosion from 5 to 10 years of age: a longitudinal study. Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication 24 April 2012; doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.32

Wikgren, M., Maripuu, M., Karlsson, T., Nordfjäll, K., Bergdahl, J., Hultdin, J., Del-Favero, J., Roos, G., Nilsson, L., Adolfsson, R., Norrback, K. (2012) Short Telomeres in Depression and the General Population Are Associated with a Hypocortisolemic State. Biological Psychiatry, 71:4, 294-300.