I’ve read comments from a few readers who disagreed with my take on vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) therapy. In fact, we've had a little debate going on for a while. In the comments on the last debate, one reader provided a link to the FDA’s site regarding VNS trials. It can be accessed here. I’ll quote from the FDA review on the site:

“The primary effectiveness endpoint for the randomized, sham-controlled study was an analysis of the percent responders (greater or equal to 50% decrease in HAM-D score from baseline to exit) between the 2 groups. In an evaluable patient population, 15.3% (17/111) of the active stimulation group were considered responders as compared to 10.0% of the sham group (11/110). The difference was not statistically significant (p=.238). [emphasis in original].” There were five other measures of depression and VNS was superior only one of them. VNS batted one for six in its pivotal outcome study.

To put it in layman’s terms, VNS was no better than sham (fake) VNS therapy. Yet this was the main study upon which the evidence for its efficacy rests. Uncontrolled studies seem to yield results of about 20% relapse at 2-year follow-up. Since these studies are uncontrolled, there is simply no way of knowing about how much of the 20% is due to VNS or the passage of time or other factors. Given that the sham therapy produced pretty much equivalent results to VNS, I believe that something outside of VNS is likely producing much of the 20% remission rate.

I understand the desperation of patients who have not found success through a variety of treatments. Perhaps VNS should be made available for some patients, but should insurers and/or the government pick up the tab for an expensive procedure that has such weak evidence of efficacy? Should controlled research emerge indicating VNS works better than psychotherapy, medication, and other alternatives in the long run, then I’ll gladly eat my words. Until that point, I see no reason to get on the bandwagon.

If readers can add something new to the debate, I'll likely jump in. If readers wish to rehash old, already posted arguments, I won't be participating.