In February 2007, I wrote a post in which I described evidence that Lilly's antipsychotic olanzapine (Zyprexa) was marketed off-label for dementia. The evidence I discussed was based on documents generously and bravely hosted at Furious Seasons. At the time, I was careful to avoid labeling the practices as illegal -- they were definitely unethical but I couldn't really say for sure what if a law was broken. However, a law firm known to represent Lilly was regularly visiting my website at the time, which made me think that Lilly was seriously concerned about legal troubles. I suppose they had good reason to be worried.

I can now officially say that the off-label marketing of Zyprexa for dementia was criminal. Lilly just admitted to committing a crime in the off-label marketing of the drug for dementia and settled legal charges for a cool $1.4 billion. And there are more cases still on the books.

For a really interesting take on this situation, listen to New York Times reporter Gardiner Harris. You can find his talk embedded in the New York Times story from January 14, 2009, which is linked here. The plea agreement in the latest case is available here.

It is important to remember that pimping Zyprexa for dementia is far from a victimless crime. Antipsychotics, including Zyprexa, have been linked to an increased rate of death in elderly patients and have also been shown to be of little to no more benefit than a placebo in reducing dementia-related symptoms (1, 2). For a disturbing account of the widespread inappropriate use of such medications, read this post and weep.

This is truly a case where lust for profits likely led to the early demise of who-knows-how-many patients. And we're just talking about dementia, not the other cases where Lilly went berzerk with marketing Zyprexa (1, 2).

Blame the Physicians Too: While much of the blame for the overuse of antipsychotics in the elderly can be placed on corporations such as Lilly, it is also true that Lilly does not directly administer the drugs. Physicians need to understand that prescribing drugs which have been found to offer little benefit but are linked to killing patients -- how is that legitimately practicing medicine? First, do no harm?? Yes, I know that dementia is a hell of a difficult condition to handle. But does that mean we should be doling out ineffective and potentially deadly treatments to "manage" persons with dementia. Yes, reps from Lilly (and likely others) wined and dined physicians, "educating" them about the benefits of Zyprexa and other antipsychotics. That's their job -- to positively spin their products. No different than a used car salesperson except that drug reps are typically much better looking.

Doctors need to use critical thinking skills -- you don't just listen to a drug rep or skim a drug-company provided journal article reprint then jump on the Zyprexa bandwagon. How about learning how to evaluate evidence so that junky marketing disguised as science does not persuade you to write inappropriate scripts? Yes, we can be outraged that Lilly and others pimp ineffective and dangerous treatments, but the physicians are the most important link. If they cannot be better educated to understand clinical trial results, and cannot take time to critically review the scientific literature, then this pattern will repeat itself over and over again. It takes tricky pharmaceutical marketing in combination with an audience that is unwilling to think critically for this type of tragedy to occur. And occur again, it will.

Unfortunately, the published scientific literature is quite biased, as negative studies tend to vanish rather than grace the pages of our journals. But it's still a much better idea for prescribers to actually read journals and critically examine their findings, as opposed to relying on marketing alone. Better yet would be for research data on medications (negative and positive) to be available for all to see.