In continuing with Religion, Spirituality and Psychology, today's post will be focused on the role of Spirituality and Psychology. In regards to the previous post, there was little literature on the psychological effects of religion and psychology. However, there was a bit more didactic literature of spirituality and psychology on the web. Everybody in their yoga positions?

Spirituality and Psychology
As mentioned above, there is not too much concrete information on the effects of spirituality that I was able to obtain, although there is a lot that can be said about the interconnection of therapy and spirituality. Dr. Stephen Diamond wrote an article in Psychology Today, The Psychology of Spirituality, stated that "...psychotherapy, when properly practiced, is an inherently spiritual venture. Understanding the psychology of spirituality is of tremendous importance to psychotherapy today. In the final analysis, the task of both psychotherapy and spirituality is to accept and redeem rather than avoid, deny, cast out, eradicate or exorcise our devils and demons. By bravely facing our inner "demons"--symbolizing those scary, shameful, primitive, uncivilized, irrational, unconscious complexes, emotions, passions and tendencies we most fear, flee from, and hence, are obsessed or haunted by--we transmute them into helpful spiritual allies." I find this to be so poignant and true, especially with those who consider themselves spiritual. For those who do consider them self spiritual, one could say you have a mini therapy session everyday whether in prayer or meditation with your God.

I found a short video from the 1970's I believe that interviewed a Frances Vaughan, Ph.D. who is a psychologist, educator and author of books, chapters and articles on psychology and spirituality. Its not that long and if you have 4:15 to spare.
Take a look.


I don't think we will ever truly understand spirituality's place in psychology, mainly because I don't think we will fully understand spirituality as a whole. It may be interesting to make a mental note of how we all view spirituality in our own lives a bit differently but at the same time, quite similarly...

Part III-I interviewed Rabbi Simcha Feuerman, LCSW-R, who is a Rabbi as well as a private practitioner in New York. We will talk to him about Religion and its role in mental health and psychotherapy. Stay tuned...
Have a good one(or two or even three)
YES