A few days ago, I posted regarding the case of Lisa Blakemore Brown, a psychologist who has run into trouble from the British Psychological Society. Since that time, the post has generated several comments (11 at the time of this posting, to be exact).
I will quote just a couple of choice snippets from them before encouraging you to check out the post and read the comments yourself. Feel free to add your two cents to the mix as well.
I have had the priviledge of reading all of the case documents and all of the transcripts of this fitness to practice "enquiry". I can assure you that none of the allegations have anything whatever to do with Lisa's diagnostic skills, her professionalism in terms of patient care, her competence as a professional, vaccine damage, Aliens or anything of the sort. The transcripts are quite simply appalling. The British Psychological Society is naturally not very keen on the idea that they should be made public. – Aubrey Blumsohn
Everyone has a RIGHT to question, and a RIGHT to search for answers, we were born with that facility built in as part of our survival instinct. That includes Lisa Blakemore Brown. – Paula
I too have read the transcripts of this so called "trial", and as Aubrey states they have nothing to do with patients or clinical practice. A single unsupportable complaint arose from a patient who was said to have been "coached" by a certain support group, and did not have anything to do with her skills. I hope the tranbscripts [sic] are placed in the public domain as soon as possible. – PM
Lisa and I are guilty of challenging a part of the belief systems of these professions and it is clear that the BPS are prepared to stoop to any underhand methods and to disregard the principles of due process, in order to seek to discredit Lisa and to thereby discredit her invaluable work on
behalf of families with autistic children. They must not be allowed to succeed. – Charles Pragnell
There are several other interesting comments, including one that takes a view quite different than the consensus of those whom I quoted above. Go here to check them out and go here to check out the story’s background in more detail.