Paxil and its advantages. Yeah, that's what this blog is about. I just recently retitled the blog; it was formerly known as the Paxil Pimp's Paradise. What am I talking about? I received an email a couple of days ago, to which I will reply in this post. Don't worry. In sticking with my informal confidentiality policy, I'll not reveal the identity of the person or his/her employer. Here is the email:
Respected Sir / Madam,

I read your review on website, please if you can provide me the the reviews for Advantages of Paroxetine for depression & anxiety. It would be more interesting if it would consist of recent data i.e. in year 2007.

I expect you [sic] early reply

Thank You.
Yes, this person works for a drug company. That's all I will reveal about the author of the email. Here is my reply...

Dear Sir/Madam,

Please see the following posts for a detailed explanation of the "advantages" of paroxetine (Paxil/Seroxat) as discussed previously on my site...
Advantage 1: Increases suicide attempts in patients.
Advantage 2: Potentially increases obesity in patients, though research is preliminary.
Advantage 3: Increase in birth defects for children whose mothers were taking Paxil while pregnant.
Advantage 4: Excellent marketing, both for social phobia and depression. Excellent use of misleading writing in so-called scientific journals when writing about the "advantages" of Paxil, including using euphemisms for unpleasantries like suicide attempts.
Advantage 5: Major discontinuation symptoms. Take Paxil for a while, try to stop and let me know what "advantage" you notice. See references at bottom of this post for a start. There are many more studies documenting clearly the difficulties with paroxetine withdrawal.
Advantage 6: Those wonderful sexual side effects. And they might last for a long time even after one stops taking the medication.
I hope you find this information useful in your search for the advantages of Paxil. I am flattered by your interest in my opinion on this matter. For additional information on paroxetine, you may want to consult Martin Keller, who has a somewhat different take than myself, but who is a potential recipient of the prestigious Golden Goblet Award for his excellent scientific work on paroxetine. Karen Wagner, another Golden Goblet Nominee, may also be an excellent source. You may also wish to consult the following websites:
Seroxat Secrets
Seroxat Sufferers
Should I be able to assist further, please let me know. There are other sources with which you will want to be familiar. You may also want to contact Philip Dawdy regarding the advantages of atypical antipsychotics, and please see Aubrey Blumsohn regarding the advantages of Actonel in treating osteoporosis. Also, I hope you contact Jack Friday, Ed Silverman, or Peter Rost to provide industry cheerleading. For any questions regarding the excellent Rozerem advertising campaign, please see John Mack. Last but absolutely not least, for any advice regarding how to outsource your scientists, fake your clinical trials, and abuse your employees, please take advice from the sage Pharma Giles.

Sincerely Yours,

Paxil Pee-Yimp #1