Sorry for the long wait for a new post. This week will be all about ADHD, from treatment and prevention to a case study. Today as we always do is make sure that everyone has a clear understanding of what it is and who it effects in the world. A few statistics before we dive in like Pete Rose. An estimated 9.5 % of children between the ages of 3-17 are diagnosed with ADHD and 4% of adults. Click here to review some other really interesting long term and short term statistics of ADHD, ADHD Figures and Statistics...Without further ado in the words of Bud Light...Here We Go!

Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder:
Could be either A or B.
A. Six or more of the following symptoms of inattention have been present for at least 6 months to a point that is disruptive and inappropriate for developmental level:
Inattention
1.   Often does not give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork, work, or other activities.
2.     Often has trouble keeping attention on tasks or play activities.
3.     Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.
4.     Often does not follow instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (not due to oppositional behavior or failure to understand instructions).
5.     Often has trouble organizing activities.
6.     Often avoids, dislikes, or doesn't want to do things that take a lot of mental effort for a long period of time (such as schoolwork or homework).
7.     Often loses things needed for tasks and activities (e.g. toys, school assignments, pencils, books, or tools).
8.     Is often easily distracted.
      9.   Is often forgetful in daily activities
B. Six or more of the following symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity have been present for at least 6 months to an extent that is disruptive and inappropriate for developmental level:
Hyperactivity
1.     Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat.
2.     Often gets up from seat when remaining in seat is expected.
3.     Often runs about or climbs when and where it is not appropriate (adolescents or adults may feel very restless).
4.     Often has trouble playing or enjoying leisure activities quietly.
5.     Is often "on the go" or often acts as if "driven by a motor".
      6.  Often talks excessively. 
 Impulsivity
1.     Often blurts out answers before questions have been finished.
2.     Often has trouble waiting one's turn.
      3.  Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations or games)

There are other subtypes but for our basic understanding this is the important aspects that are important for us to know and learn about it during the week. 

Stay tuned for the rest of ADHD week!
Good day for a Monday!
YES