I am a little late in reporting this story, but there is a must-read post from Jonathan Leo over at Chemical Imbalance that I must bring to your attention. Many bloggers have chimed in about the radio program The Infinite Mind broadcast about SSRIs. Most writers have focused, understandably, on the myriad unreported conflicts of interest of the guests on the show. But the conflicts of interest are not the most important part of this saga -- the terribly misleading information on the program, which aired on National Public Radio outlets, is the main problem.

Leo compares the data on SSRIs and suicide to the blatantly false statements made by the The Infinite Mind commentators. He notes, for example, that it is utter BS to state that nobody committed suicide in antidepressant trials submitted to the FDA -- in children there were no suicides, but among adults there certainly were. And kids who dropped out of the studies due to poor response or side effects, well, who knows what happened to them?

Leo also notes that the commentators were dead wrong about their alleged evidence linking decreased prescriptions of SSRIs to an increase in suicides. I also noted the same problem. He then proceeds to make point after point about the commentators overstating the efficacy of antidepressants.

As I've written before, conflicts of interest are important. But rather than just noting that people have conflicts, it is important to show the data -- are people with conflicts of interest misstating the evidence in a manner that reflects the conflict of interest? In the case of The Infinite Mind, the answer is a clear yes. Leo's post is quite lengthy, but well worth the time.

Update (08-31-08): My mistake. I had earlier called the program All in The Mind, which is vastly incorrect. The program was The Infinite Mind (as has been corrected above). This post has absolutely nothing to do with All in The Mind, which is a program which airs on Australia's Radio National. In fact, I've listened to a couple of All in the Mind broadcasts previously and found them to be well-done. Thanks to a commenter for catching my error.