And a very happy good day to all NY GIANT FANS on their Superbowl 46 Win!! Last post, I wrote about the negative effects of watching the SuperBowl and everything involved, in part two, we will see the potential positive side effects of the SuperBowl. Though through my research for this post, I did not find any publications on the web or otherwise any documented research on positive effects of the Superbowl. So I am going to fly this post solo... There were a few social psychology themes that came to mind when I looked around the room at my Superbowl party and sports in general.

1-My first overall thought was the idea and notion of unity and comradery. Sports has this unique way of bringing people together. Often it breaks ethnic and racial barriers, doesn't matter if you're Black, White, Latino, Asian, it brings us together. They say that food is the international language, but I think you can throw sports and particularly football as the national language. You may be not interested in the least about the game, but in the atmosphere you almost certain to swept up in the feeling. There is strength in numbers and sometimes that leads to good and bad reactions.
2-Feelings. I think the best and the worst of people come out when they are involved with sports. I see this as a fascinating idea because that means those who claim "they don't feel". Those emotions really come out when sports are involved, I have seen the most introverted of people become these emotional Juggernaut screaming at the TV. Furthermore, an array of emotions are exhibited during and after. I read that Greg Jones of the NY Giants proposed to his girlfriend after their Superbowl win, or Vernon Davis of the San Fransisco 49ers, scoring a winning touchdown to seal the 49ers into the NFC Championship game.

I think there is a lot we can learn about sports and how people handle themselves on and off the field and what could be the positive attributes of players and fans.
Enjoy this Win Big Blue fans!!!!
YES