In a recent post, Daniel Carlat apologized to Charles Nemeroff for nicknaming him "Bling Bling" in a prior post. So what? Who cares? Well, I think we need to take a look at what behavior requires an apology and what does not. I'm not saying I have the answers, but I think the issue is quite important.

Let's look at some documented issues regarding Nemeroff:

ARISE-RD 1: Nemeroff was an author on a study (called ARISE-RD) examining the use of risperidone as an antidepressant. The study results did not demonstrate that the drug worked, especially after the authors issued a correction indicating that one of the findings in the published version of the study was incorrect (oops -- sorry that we mentioned that the drug worked; we screwed up -- it really did not work).

ARISE-RD 2: The study results were clearly not reported in full, leaving open the possibility that unfavorable data for risperidone was simply swept under the rug.

ARISE-RD 3: The study was published in a journal of which Nemeroff was the editor. Strangely, he did not report that he had a financial conflict of interest in the study, though the journal requires such relationships to be disclosed.

ARISE-RD 4: Authorship was switched around, leading one to wonder if the authorship line was an accurate reflection of who contributed significantly to the study or if it included an effort to stamp on the names of several "key opinion leaders" in order to improve the study's marketing value (1, 2 ).

I strongly encourage readers to read the linked posts above in order to plumb the depths to which this study appeared to be flawed. But there's more...

VNS: In his role of journal editor, Nemeroff again failed to disclose relevant conflicts of interest regarding a study that appeared in his journal and upon which he was an author. Read more on that tale here and here.

Mifepristone/RU-486: Nemeroff wrote an article reviewing various treatments. One treatment he mentioned was mifepristone (Corlux/RU-486). Nemeroff serves in a paid advisory role to Corcept, maker of the drug. He concluded, based upon incredibly weak evidence, in the review, that mifepristone was "very effective" in treating psychotic depression.

Lithium patch: In the same review article as mentioned above, Nemeroff mentioned that the lithium patch improved tolerability and compliance. So the patch made patients stick with treatment better and lowered the side effect burden. Oh, and Nemeroff did not cite a single source to back up these claims. Um, the entire point of a review article is to make claims and back them with sources. Nemeroff holds the patent for the lithium patch, by the way.

David Healy: According to some sources (not entirely confirmed, though I believe it), Nemeroff was part of the effort to get David Healy ousted from his position at the Univeristy of Toronto. It's a long story, worth reading about here and here. As readers of my site know, I have cited Healy's work here many times due to his close knowledge of data regarding psychiatric medications (particularly SSRI's) -- he's a good scientist with, in my mind, a very strong conscience. If Nemeroff was involved in getting Healy's position rescinded, then I say shame on him.

CME and Dr. Nemeroff: Dr. Nemeroff, like many key opinion leaders, is willing to set his name on journal supplement papers which are then used for continuing medical education. Daniel Carlat has a great post about a recent CME activity, upon which Nemeroff was an author, that seemed to magically transform unfounded ideas into "science" by just adding a sprinkling of money from the sponsor, Bristol Myers Squibb. Kinda made me think of a Chia Pet for some reason. Suh-Suh-Suh-Science! to the tune of Chuh-Chuh-Chuh-Chia!

So looking at the above list of items involving Nemeroff, I ask readers: Is it okay to nickname someone "Bling Bling" or to nominate someone for a Golden Goblet award? Please chime in with a comment to let me know. Is it acceptable sarcasm or is it character assassination, or something else?

The Point: I'm not in favor of name calling, nor am I in favor of being a jerk. But where does one draw the line? Where is the line drawn between acceptable reporting on controversial and important issues and being a bully? Over at the Drug Wonks blog, there are several posts that take aim at Steve Nissen and others, often using a nastier tone than nicknaming people "Bling Bling." Plenty of mudslinging occurs in blogs and in the "old media" -- watch most of the talking heads on so-called cable "news" networks and see what I mean. How often, and to what degree, is someone allowed to use sarcasm before it becomes rude and bullying? Part of writing is entertaining one's audience, and let's face it -- sarcasm can be very entertaining. How is a blogger to be entertaining, stick to the facts, and bring important information to readers without crossing the line into being offensive? I don't know. Perhaps you do -- again, leave a comment and see if you can shed light on this issue.