It seemed too big a risk.

Were we up to the challenge?

Would it be possible to keep our Christmas tree upright and intact this year? 

It is, after all, our kitten Hammie's first Christmas.

Memories of Christmas past are fresh and daunting. Even our sweet Gus caused Christmas havoc back in the day.

                                                    Gus' first Christmas in 1998

But now, at 14, he does little but sleep and purr, preferably snuggled up to a friend.

                                            Gus with Hammie - December 2012

And Maggie and SweetPea love to look at the Christmas tree, but know to keep their paws off.

                                     Maggie and SweetPea: A Well-Behaved Duo

With all these well-behaved role models, we decided it was worth the risk of putting up the tree this year. And we were encouraged by Hammie's reaction: interest but restraint. He liked to sit near the tree, but never once, while we were admiring it together, did he venture close to the tree or the ornaments.

                                 Hammie: Six months old and a model of restraint

Bob and I were so confident that all was well, we went down to the street for a visit with our friends Phyllis and Wally, leaving Hammie still relaxing on the couch, enjoying the tree.

When we came home, we noticed something strange.  The tree skirt that Bob's mother made for us some years ago, that is usually curled around the base of the tree as shown below, was missing!

                                                Exhibit A: The Tree with Tree Skirt

                                    Exhibit B: Scene of the Crime - a Bare Tree Stand                                                         
                           
 True detectives, we followed the trail of evidence:

                                                And this led us directly to the Tree Skirt Thief:


                                                        Hammie the Tree Skirt Thief



                                    Mug Shot: The Culprit - Guilty As Charged


Wishing you and yours a wonderful, joyous Christmas Holiday!                                       