Suddenly, I feel sorry for the Snowbirds: those traveling folk who winter in Arizona and otherwise live elsewhere. I've never felt they got a particularly great deal: Arizona gets cold in the winter! No one lingers in our gorgeous beach entry recreational pool with its chilly water. Golf takes a generous mix of dedication and stoicism as Arctic winds whip over our greens. People in this part of the state may not be shoveling snow, but we're turning up our thermostats and hunkering down this week for a record cold snap.

How cold?

Predictions are for overnight temperatures ranging from 19-23 F for the next five days.

Bring out the burlap! Our occasional ritual of wrapping our fragile citrus trees in burlap and sheets has begun. We're capping our more vulnerable cactus plants and throwing tarps over flower beds. We're wrapping up water pipes.

We're ready for winter Arizona-style.

                                       A decidedly different view from our patio

                                          Our newly ghostly backyard  

                                     New use for our leftover Christmas cups   

                                   Next door neighbor Larry gets his yard ready       

                          Joe and Marsha's yard is well-prepared for frosty nights          

I just got an email from my dear friend Tim, basking in an unseasonably warm Chicago (mid-50's), and happily advising us to stay warm. He gleefully offered to send us some flannel undergarments for our ordeal.

We may not be quite ready for long winter underwear, but some things might help on this cold night.

Hot chocolate or steaming mugs of coffee.

Cozy quilts.

A warm cat -- or four -- as the cats recoil from their favorite screen doors in favor of huddling together on our bed.

                                  Bob settling in with some wonderfully warm cats 


And, of course, we have each other. Hmmm...chocolate, quilts, cats and each other.

We're grateful for all we share on this bright, cold, star-lit night.

                                          It's going to be a four-cat night!                        