The display was just inside the entrance of our local Safeway supermarket this morning: a circle of paper shopping bags filled with grocery staples and a sign inviting us to pick one up, pay $10 for it at the check stand and it would be donated to a local needy family.

I was immediately skeptical. We donate regularly to our local food bank. This corporate sponsored charity triggered suspicion: was the merchandise really worth $10? Were we supposed to pay $10 for it and the store -- or the corporation behind the store -- would take a gigantic charitable tax deduction? Would these even go out to needy families -- or would they be recirculated back to that circle for another sucker to come in and drop $10? I walked past the display thinking "What's the scam here anyway?"

I'll have to admit I've been feeling angry, disgusted and dismayed lately about corporate greed and cynicism, about the Koch brothers' pollution of the political scene, about deficit solutions that propose taking from the middle class, poor and elderly while the fat cats will still get the tax deductions for their corporate jets and non-taxpaying, job-outsourcing corporations continue to suck in obscene profits and tax credits.

Lately, I've been going to the grocery store in a dark mood.  I go with a list of products produced by the  Koch industries and studiously boycott every product on the list. Voting with my checkbook feels somewhat meaningful even if my vote at the polls pales in comparison to corporate influence. This morning, I glanced at my Koch list irritably and then looked behind me.

Bob had picked up one of the paper bags and was putting it in the basket. I scowled. We weren't going to be suckers for some corporate scam!

"The point is that this sack of food will go to some needy family," Bob said. "We've been so blessed in life. How can we not give back? Even though you think it's just another corporate scam, what if this bag of groceries would make a real difference for someone struggling to feed his or her family?"

I thought about it -- and realized that he was right. And I reflected sadly about how my cynicism was beginning to block my altruism.  And I thought about about how our hope as citizens and as a nation lies in not losing our humanity and our compassion for each other.

The divisions, the inequities, and the rage at those who are different in any way from us are some of the most frightening aspects of life in the U.S. today. Right wing pundits take aim at unionized teachers, firefighters and police. The younger generations grumble about the greedy geezers who are supposedly living high on the hog with their Social Security riches and Medicare benefits. The less affluent are looking more critically at the lifestyles of the very rich.  The financial gap between the rich and the rest of us is widening. Both political parties seem more interested in playing partisan games than in the economic well-being and future of the nation.

But, at least until the next election, that is out of our hands. Or maybe it is forever out of our hands. The question is now what can we as individuals do to counteract the epidemic of selfishness, greed and lack of empathy sweeping the land?

Maybe we can step back from our own cynicism, our own partisan opinions, and find ways to care for each other again. Maybe we can stop focusing on what divides us from others and concentrate, instead, on what we share.  Maybe, setting aside fears of economic meltdowns, terrorism and political insanity, we can live with gratitude for today and for what we do have and reach out to help those less fortunate.

It's all a matter of taking that first step away from anger, suspicion and dire expectations -- and opting for empathy and good will. The only time we really have is the present. The only people we can really change? Ourselves. How we view those around us is our own decision. In these tumultuous times, we can make the choice to trust, to give, to love.

I took a deep breath. Then,  agreeing with Bob that we, indeed, have been blessed, I made extra space in our shopping cart for that paper bag.