Tomorrow, June 13th, will be my one-year blogiversary.  And what an exciting year it has been - especially becoming connected with the paleo blogging community.  I credit the tried and true long-timers for helping my little niche nutrition and psychiatry blog become successful (and am humbled that such terrific minds could consider my blog worthy) - Stephan Guyenet is consistently my biggest referral source.  Peter at Hyperlipid has given me a nod.  Kurt Harris put me on his blogroll very early and is also a great referrer here (in addition he's a great person to knock around a few ideas with, and of course he helped me get my gig at Psychology Today).  Melissa has mentioned my blog several times, always describing my posts as "dense" (which I find really funny, for some reason :-) ).  Chris Masterjohn has also linked to me and complimented my kids, which I like!  More recently, Mark Sisson asked me to do a guest post, resulting in a surge of readership.  Dr. T. and Dr. BG at Nephropal had me do an early post as well.  Richard has supported me on twitter, and Dr. Eades been gracious enough to link my blog several times in his comments.  Andrew has linked to me on twitter and on his blog.  Patrik even put one of my entries as the header at Paleohacks.  So you see, with that kind of firepower helping me out, I can't help but be rocketed forward in 12 short months!

I can't possibly mention everyone - but special thanks go out of course to Jamie Scott (now surfing on volcanoes) and Paul and Shou-Ching Jaminet  - all have been in the paleosphere for a bit over a year, and are great friends and referrers.

In the next few months a bunch of exciting things are coming up - including a podcast with Chris Kresser (who has also helped me out by linking to me on twitter and facebook) and the release of my podcast with Jimmy Moore.  And, of course, most exciting of all is the upcoming Ancestral Health Symposium, where it looks like I'll get to meet more of my blogging buddies, and I'll present with Jamie about resiliency and human-friendly ways to cultivate it.  I'll also be attending the MovNat One Day Workshop while in LA, and I am thrilled to be able to do that.

Whew.  Thanks of course to all the readers and commenters and paper fairies.  We're all in this together.

Oh, and I refurbished my magnesium posts for Psychology Today - so go take a look!

Magnesium and the Brain:  The Original Chill Pill.