Free Resources!
ACT v. SAT handout-free handout for students who are confused about which test to take.
American Indian College Scholarship Fund-Minority scholarship.
America Careers-Free career resource.
ASVAB-Military and career resource.
Black Higher Education Resources-Minority scholarships and information.
Big Future College Calendar-Resource from College Board.
Braintrack-College/Career search.
Bureau of Labor Statistics-look for the up and coming jobs of the future.
Cappex-great source of handouts, colleges, scholarships, and high school counselor management site.
Careers-Career Resources for students.
Career Key-Free resource and assessment to help career resources.
Career One Stop -Explore careers, salaries, and skill readiness.
College Career Life Planning Guide for School Counselors
Collegexpress-Private Colleges and Universities.
College Fairs -City list
College View-Equipping counselors to help their students with their college search.
College Wise-Resources for High School Counselors-list of resources for high school counselors to help their students in their college planning.
College Net-College finder for students.
Common Application-Application for high school students to apply to college.
Construct My Future
Counselors College Toolkit-Free resources for high school counselors to assist the college search.
Counselor Resources-Resources from South Carolina.
Debt Free Scholar-Free E-Book.
Early Decision and Early Action-Description for students.
E-Campus Tours-Free campus tours.
FAFSA-official site for the FAFSA.
FastWeb Scholarship Search-Free scholarship search site.
Federal Student Aid at a Glance-Parent/Student Handout
Finaid-college aid, military aid, financial aid calculators, and more.
First in the Family-site for first time college students.
Gates Millennium Scholarship-Minority scholarship program.
Go College-Free college site for students.
Going to College Resources-Find your state and find career resources, financial aid, and college planning guides.
Guide for the College Bound Student-Resource from Newport News, VA
Guide to College and Careers Blog-Barbara Cooke
GPA Conversion Tool-learn how to compute your gpa.
Immigrant Scholarship Guide-Minority scholarships.
Making High School Count-High School presentations and information.
Mapping Your Future/Going to College Freshman Guide
Mapping Your Future.org Going to College/ Sophomore Guide
Mapping Your Future Going to College/Junior Guide
Mapping Your Future Going to College Guide/Senior Guide
March 2 Success-Free test prep.
Military Websites-Website with military information of all branches.
Military Career Guide
Mind Tools
My Future-Comprehensive career toolbox.
My Major-College major information.
My Road from College Board-College and career planner.
National Association for College Admission Counseling-Great free resources for school counselors.
National Office of School Counselor Advocacy-Great resource for school counselors.
Next Step Magazine-Great information for students searching for college information.
Number2-Free test prep for students.
O'Net-career resources and exploration.
Paying for College-Online module for high school students.
Peterson's College Resources
Preparing to Become a College Athlete Presentation-Information for high school athletes.
Princeton Review Test Prep for Students-Free test prep for students.
PSAT Results Explained by College Board-Free presentation explaining the PSAT.
Ready, Set, College-
Scholarships and Financial Aid Programs in the US-Explanation of financial aid and scholarships in the US.
Scholarship Experts-Scholarship Search Site.
School Soup-Scholarship Search Site.
Study Guide Zone-SAT study guide.
Student Aid-A description of different types of financial aid by the US Government.
Student Athlete Handout
Super College-Find scholarships to pay for college.
Technical and Trade Schools by State
Two Year Colleges in the United States
U Can Go To College High School Counselor Resources-Great resource for handouts, power points, interest surveys, financial aid, and college planning lists for all students.
United Negro College Fund
Videos-Helpful career videos like "how to tie a tie", "handshakes", and "how to dress for an interview".
Western Association for College Admissions Counseling High School Counselor Toolkit
XAP-Counselor student tracker.
Zinch-College scholarships and resources for students.