A BIG warm thank you to Franciene Sabens from School Counselor Space  for nominating For High School Counselors for a Leibster Award! If you have not been to her blog, please go check it out.  She is truly talented!!

Since I have been on "couch rest" for a torn calf muscle, I am taking the time to honor my colleague's nomination for my blog that is in its second year of publication.  Again, thank you Francine and I look forwarding to meeting you soon!


Since blogging, I have had the ability to connect with some of the greatest counseling minds in the United States and Canada.  I would encourage my high school counselors to step out and start writing about your experiences as you don't know the impact you will have on another school counselor!!

Oh, let me get back to the rules for the Liebster Award.

1. What are your favorite blogs?

This is really hard for me because there are so many that I like, but I find myself going to these the most. 
SC Online Professional Exchange (SCOPE)
The Counseling Geek
School Counsellor Talk
School Counselor Space
Extraordinary School Counselor Blog

2.  Why did you start blogging?

When I started reading blogs there were a lot of blogs for elementary and middle school counselors, but not a lot out there for high school folk.  My reason for blogging was to offer my experiences and the resources I have gathered over the last 14 years.

3. Share 3 things about yourself that most of your followers wouldn't know.
I compete in cross fit competitions
I am the chair of the Association for Conflict Resolution
I am a certified peer helper trainer

4. What is your favorite thing about your job? 

My favorite part of my job is to see a kid that I have worked with for four years walk across the stage.


5. What would you be doing if you weren't in the School Counseling field?

A meteorologist - I love weather and I watch the Weather Channel all the time (yes, I am a geek).

6. What do you do for self care?

Exercising (when I am not down with a leg injury), spending time with the Lord (got to have our time together before I get out of the house), drinking coffee in the morning, and taking time to go to the hairdresser once a month.

7. What are your top 5 tech tools?
Google Docs
Pinterest
Twitter
Pic Monkey
Smore
8. What books are you currently reading?

The Confident Women by J. Meyer


9. What's your guilty pleasure TV show?

I am embarrassed about this one- Impractical Jokers
I really don't watch tv, but I saw this one evening on a marathon and found myself laughing hysterically. I am by nature a joker and I love how they can do the jokes on the spot. Side note- I don't like a lot of the over the top content in the show.

10. What is your favorite quote?

The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is that good men do nothing.

11. If you could live any where in the world where would it be?

New Zealand - If I am going to live there, I have to do it before I am 55.  NZ has a cut off for immigration...sigh.

My nominations for the Liebster Award are:

1. The Counseling Geek
2. The Middle School Counselor
3. School Counselor Crowd Blog
4. Pikesville High School Counseling Blog
5. From the Counselor's Office

The rules are:
1. Link back to the blog that nominated you.
2. Nominate 5-11 blogs with fewer than 200 followers.
3. Answer the questions posted for you by your nominator.
4. Create 11 questions for your nominees.
5. Contact your nominees and let them know you nominated them.
  Here are your questions nominees?
  1. What are your favorite blogs?
2. What inspired you to become a counselor?
3. If you were not a counselor, what occupation would you like to work in?
4. What are your favorite hobbies?
5. What is your favorite dessert?
6. If you could travel anywhere in the world, where would you go?
7. What is the favorite part of your job?
8. What was the last movie you watched?
9. What are your top 5 tech tools?
10. Which blog do you go to the most?
11. What is one interesting fact you want to share with your followers?

Congrats nominees!!
   