If you are like me, you are always compiling college resources for parents and students. So, I decided to put a list of some of the most popular college resources (these were found on many sites frequented by school counselors) that you may be interested in using.  Please know this is not an exhaustive list and if you have additional resources, PLEASE feel free to share!  

Enjoy!!

Resources


10 Things Know About the New FAFSA Changes- Article written by The College Solution.

Accepted to College - Provides financial aid planning to students.

ACT College Planning Guide

Advising Undocumented Students - Need help advising undocumented students?  Get the help you need from this College Board Guide.

Better Make Room - Foundation created by Michelle Obama that provides resources for your own college signing day.

Big Future - Resource to assist students in finding, paying, and planning for college.

Cappex - Assist students in finding scholarships that match their interests.

College Application Timeline - Specially targets seniors.

College Board - Downloaded resources for school counselors.

College Board - College planning checklist for students.

College Bound - Great information for students about the college experience.

College Choice - Great resource for school counselors that includes college rankings, paying for college, college scholarships, becoming a successful applicant, and lots more.

College Explorer - high school senior checklist for students.

College Fee Waivers - Site that allows students to search for colleges with fee waivers.

College Grazing - Free lessons plans on college readiness for students in grades 9-12.

College Handbook

College Planning Resources for the College Bound Teen - A massive list of college planning resources for students (too many to count!)

College Raptor - Resources for school counselors.

College Tours - Website that hosts virtual tours for students and parents.

College Week Live - Free resource to assist high school students in connecting with college admissions.

Common App Training 

E-Campus Tours - Provides virtual tours of college campuses.

Education Planner - Free resource to help students learn about and explore careers.

Fast Web - Provides financial aid information for students and families.

Go College - Free resources for students and parents regarding college.

I'm First - Resource supporting first generation college students.

Khan Academy - Free test prep for the SAT and ACT.

Know How 2 Go - Website that encourages students and veterans to  prepare for postsecondary options.

Link Magazine - Resource contains handouts, college information, net price calculator, and much more!

MAPP - Free career assessment for students.

Mapping Your Future - Offers advice for high school students of all ages who want to go to college.

My Majors - Help students find college majors that are right for them.

National Association for the Education of Homeless Children and Youth -Resources for working with homeless and foster students.

National College Fairs - Free college fairs around the US that help students to meet and talk to college recruiters.

NACAC College Resource - Information for parents and students when searching for colleges.

Next Step - Great resource for college and financial aid searches.

NOSCA Counselor's Guide to College Competency

Number 2 - Free test prep resources for the SAT and ACT.

Pathway to College  - Free Resource shared by The Counseling Geek.

QuestBridge - Resource helping students to prepare, apply, and pay for college.

School Counseling and Post Secondary Success

Think About It Campus Clarity   - Preparing new college students for risky situations in college.

Tips for Grandparents Raising Grandchildren

Who Are You  - Free toolkit that uses group exercises and a short film to educate young people about the prevention of sexual violence and ethical decision making.

Blogs Focused on College 
Chegg Play - Blog for students about college.  Check out the blog on Surviving Life in the Dorm.

Counselor's Corner - High School counselor Patrick O'Connor's blog contains great information for high school counselors and high school students.

Counselor Traci -  Great blog about college resources by college counselor and instructor, Traci Brown.  This blog gets an A for its creativity and information for school counselors.

High School Counselor Week - High school blog featuring weekly stories, facts, trends and other information for school counselors in each region of the US.  School counselors are able to sign up for a weekly newsletter from his or her region of the US.

The College Solution - Although this blog is not written by a high school counselor or educator, it is definitely worth your time to look at this site by Lynn O’Shaughnessy.  She is a former news reporter who writes about "all things college" from financial aid, party schools, standardized testing, and much more!
Conferences

NSCAC Conference
Boston, MA


Other Blog Posts from For High School Counselors
College, I Choose You!

National College Application Month