April is the first full month of spring which brings the opportunity to educate students about alcohol use, prom safety, distracted driving, stress, and even sexual health issues.  Below is a list of awareness campaigns and several resources school counselors can use to educate their students.

Alcohol Awareness Month


Theme: "For the Health of It: Early Education on Alcoholism and Addiction"

The purpose of Alcohol Awareness Month is to increase public understanding and help communities focus on alcohol related issues. Researchers at the National Council on Alcoholism & Drug Dependence report that teen alcohol use is very dangerous to the student and community. Teen alcoholism is directly related to automobile accidents, violence, suicide, unsafe sex, and behavior problems at home and the school. Since the adolescent brain is not fully developed, teens may not be aware of the consequences of drinking during a celebration, party, in a car, or other social functions.  Preventing drinking at a young age is imperative to reducing alcoholism and future substance abuse.

Find resources to use with your school, parents, and students to increase awareness!

Resources:

Organizer's Guide
Facts About Underage Drinking
Healthy Place: Teen Alcohol Statistics
Prevention

For Mental Health Professionals:

Toolkit: Connection Between Trauma and Substance Abuse

For Parents:

Talk to Your Grads About Alcohol Use
Organizing a Safe & Sober Event

For Students:

Self Test for Teens
Drinking Too Much Too Fast Can Kill You
Above the Influence
Teen Health Information on Drugs & Alcohol
Alcohol Energy Drinks

How to Choose a Designated Driver:
Call a cab.
Contact a local safe ride program like SafeRide America.
Request a ride from Uber or another car service.
Use public transportation.
Call your parent or another trusted adult.
Stay put until someone can pick you up or stay with a friend.

Global Youth Service Day

Global Youth Service Day is the only day of service designated for youth. 

Global Youth Service Day

Semester of Service Educator Guide

Global Service Ideas Include

Host a bake sale to help hungry kids or set up a lemonade stand to help children with cancer.
Collect food for a local food bank.
Order trees to plant in your community.
Organize a trash mob to pick up litter on streets and highways.  See the video below from Baltimore for ideas.

Host a Stow It, Don't Throw It event to promote recycling.
Prepare a family disaster kit.


National  Distracted Driving Awareness Month

Distraction.gov
Traffic Safety Calendar
Understanding the Distracted Brain

Posters:
Distracted Driving Poster
Calls Kill Poster
Consequences Can Be Deadly Poster

Fact Sheets:
Habit Worth Breaking
Hands Free Myth

Webinars:
Brains On Technology

Videos:
National Safety Council Videos


Safe Prom and Graduation Awareness

SADD Prom/Graduation Activities

Some Ideas Before Prom Night...

Have elementary students write notes to high school students reminding them not to drink and drive on prom night.

Have students sign the prom promise to remain sober on prom night.  See the Safe and Sober Pledge.

Have flower shops hang a sign in their window asking students to stay sober.

Safe Prom Events


Safe and Sober Prom
Post Prom
After Prom

Tips:
Safety Tips for the CDC


Sexual Assault Awareness Month

National Sexual Violence Resource Center
Sexual Assault Awareness Toolkit
Safer Campus
What is Campus Sexual Violence?
Becoming an Agent of Social Change-Youth Guide
Stopping Harassment at School
What is Healthy Sexuality and Consent?
Preventing Acquaintance Rape-Guide for Teens
Surviving Acquaintance Rape

Circle of 6 Phone App - Although developed for college students, think about adapting the Circle of 6 App for your high school students.  Great idea for teens to have before Spring Break and/or prom.  The phone app allows a teen to text your friends in the case of emergency and asks them to come and get him or her.

Circle of 6 Instructions

Healthy Relationship Toolkit


STD Education and Awareness Month

Sexually transmitted diseases can impact anyone, but takes a heavy toll on teens.  Teens under the age of 25 need to be tested at least twice a year.

Most common STDs for Teens:

Chlamydia
Herpes
Gonorrhea
HPV

STD Awareness Event Guide

It's Your Life: STD Testing

Centers for Disease Control -Information regarding sexually transmitted diseases.

Girls Health - Straight talk about STDs.


Stress Awareness Month

Stress Facts
Stress Awareness Poster
Stress Awareness Poster
Email Blast
Stress Tips
Mayo Clinic: Stress Tips
Coping in Hard Times For Youth
Seasonal Affective Disorder


Striking Out Stress Lesson Plan








Day of Silence

The Day of Silence (DOS) is a student led event to stand against bullying and harassment for LQBTQ students in schools.  The first event was held at the University in VA in 1996.

Facts About the Day of Silence
Day of Silence Poster
Day of Silence Ideas
DOS Pledge
Tips When Facing Opposition from Administration
Speaking Cards