With homecoming right around the corner, what better time to "drive" home the importance of distracted and impaired driving safety for high school students and parents. 

There are several programs sponsored by major US companies and agencies that are making a difference in educating parents and teens about the dangers of distracted driving during homecoming season. As a school counselor, think about sharing these campaigns with your clubs, organizations, homecoming committee, peer helper groups, or community service groups to get the word out that everyone is impacted by distracted and impaired driving.

Distracted Driving Campaigns

September 19th - It Can Wait Campaign


Get tools from AT&T to educate your students, parents, and staff about distracted driving.  Also, have your students and staff take the It Can Wait Pledge.

Our student helpers have a big campaign planned for that day!!
They will paint the sidewalks, streets, and parking lots with the #X to let student and parents know they should put up the phone while driving.
They will create and wear shirts with the #X symbol.
They will encourage students, teachers, and parents to download the free app that will send out a message that they are unavailable to talk because they are driving. 
They will encourage everyone to take the "It Can Wait" pledge.
They will put up the #X symbol all over the school.
October 15th-24th - Celebrate My Drive



Sponsored by State Farm, schools are encouraged to register and get as many people to vote for their school to win recognition and prizes.  Lots of great ideas on this site for staff and students. 

1st Place - School wins a concert with the Band Perry and $100,000!

Other Resources:

Teens in the Driver's Seat - a peer to peer led program that promotes driving safety for students.  Their program is free in many states (California, Connecticut, Georgia, Montana, Nebraska, and Texas) where educators can order t-shirts, pens, bumper stickers, arm bands, and thumb bands.  Each year, Teens in the Driver's Seat hosts a conference in Texas.  Check out their website for lots of information and ideas!



National Safety Council - provides statistics, resources, and products for educators to teach students about safe driving practices. Each year the NSC awards a individual or organization that has made significant contributions to reducing crashes, injuries, and deaths among teen drivers.





Do you have a program you would like to share with your colleagues about distracted driving?  If so, please feel free to send them to me so I can share!!