This dynamic training is for all BEGINNERS in peer helping program development. Learn about program start-up, program implementation, and program maintenance and evaluation. Apply NAPPP Standards and Ethics to your peer program.

Peer helping programs can include one-on-one helping, mentoring, mediation, tutoring, leadership, and peer education. This training is designed to help the adult professional learn the basic steps in designing and establishing any peer-led program. The specific type of program developed depends upon the school's needs, resources, organizational structure, goals and mission. The realm of possibilities is limitless! Bring your ideas and creativity!

If you are interested in receiving the National Association of Peer Program Professionals Certified Peer Program Professional (CPPE) designation as a result of this training, you will be asked to do some pre and post activities.

Objectives of this Pre-Conference Include:
Learn about National Association of Peer Program Professionals (NAPPP) Programmatic Standards and Ethics
Know examples of peer helping at the elementary, middle and high school.
Analyze how to utilize peer helping in the delivery of "Closing the GAP Action Plan" and the "School Counseling Core Curriculum Action Plan".
Put together a peer helping plan for your organization based on need.

Pre-Conference Introduction



ASCA Conference Information 
ASCA Conference Brochure

ASCA Pre-Conference Workshops

World Swan and Dolphin Hotel



Your Presenters
Dr. Roselind Bogner is a licensed mental health counselor and the Director of the School Counseling program at Niagara University. Her educational credentials include: Doctor of Philosophy in Counselor Education (SUNY at Buffalo), Certificate of Advanced Studies in School Administration (SUC at Fredonia), Masters in Elementary Education (SUNY at Buffalo), and Bachelor of Arts in Psychology (SUNY at Buffalo). She is also a Certified Peer Program Educator (CPPE), trainer and consultant for the National Association of Peer Program Professionals (NAPPP).

In October, 2011 she received the “Career Achievement Award” from the New York State School Counselor Association in recognition of her outstanding record of service to the profession and her substantial and ongoing contributions to her students, place of employment, colleagues and community. In March 2011 the National Association of Peer Program Professionals (NAPPP) issued a proclamation of appreciation naming Roselind a “National Role Model in the Peer Program Field” because she was “instrumental in helping to make NAPPP a viable and major contributor to excellence in peer program professionalism. By her expertise in training both peer program professionals and youth, by her creation and sharing of materials for operation of peer programs and for her exemplary service to the NAPPP Board of Directors”.

As a high school counselor she developed and implemented two peer helping programs in collaboration with a team of teachers. For ten years she supervised the programs that empowered students to help their peers in innumerable ways. As a NAPPP trainer/consultant she has advised and trained peer program professionals and peer helpers in an array of programs focusing on peer education, peer tutoring, peer mentoring, peer listening, and peer mediation.

Dr. Bogner's professional presentation and research topics include: Creating and Implementing Career Development Programs; College and Career Readiness Preparation; Common Core State Standards; Promoting STEM Careers; Developing and Implementing Peer Helper Programs Which Enhance School Counseling Programs; Strategies for Promoting Asset Development in Youth; and Developing and Implementing Comprehensive School Counseling Programs.


Dr. Cynthia Morton is a licensed professional counselor and mediator who serves as lead counselor at Salem High School in Conyers, Georgia. In addition to her role as school counselor, she trains and coordinates the Rockdale County Schools Peer Helper and Mediation Programs. Her Peer Program at Salem H.S. is a NAPPP Certified Program. 

Dr. Morton belongs to several professional organizations. She is a certified peer professional trainer/consultant, CPPE and board member with the National Association of Peer Programs Professionals, the Association for Conflict Resolution Education Section where she serves as chair, Georgia Association for Conflict Resolution (former president), American School Counselors Association, and a current member of the National Association of Professional Women where she was voted as 2012-13 Woman of the Year.

Dr. Morton has presented at several academic conferences including the 2002 Foundation of Excellent Schools, the 2002 Georgia Tech Prep Institute, the 2007 Georgia School Counselor Association Annual Conference, 2008 and 2009 National Association for Conflict Resolution Conferences, the 2012 Georgia School Social Worker Association Conference, and the 2013 National Peer Helper Conference.

Currently, Dr. Morton has been invited to become a trainer of conflict resolution education for educators by Dr. Tricia Jones of Temple University.

About the National Association of Peer Program Professionals
The National Association of Peer Program Professionals (NAPPP) was established after the dissolution of The National Association of Peer Programs, originally founded in 1984 as the National Peer Helpers Association. NAPPP is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation whose mission is to help adults establish, train, supervise, maintain and evaluate peer programs. Using the NAPPP Standards and Ethics as a guiding principle, NAPPP helps adults through networking, leadership training, certification and programmatic problem solving.

NAPPP is dedicated to promoting excellence in peer programs. Its membership is adult professionals who are responsible for peer programs. Since peer programs currently exist in schools, social service agencies, faith communities, geographic communities, nursing homes and youth organizations, the NAPPP membership is composed of representatives from many populations. The largest representation of NAPPP members is from the K-12 school and higher education population.