 Well 2016 has finally come to an end and I am looking forward to writing many new posts for 2017.  At the end of each year, I like to share my 10 top blog posts for the year.  Please enjoy!

Out of the Box Red Ribbon Ideas
Check out my blog post about some of the most unique Red Ribbon ideas that I could find.  This post discusses the connection between drugs and terrorism, how to truly educate your faculty and staff about teen drug use, and gives you lots of tips on how to create some of the most "out of the box" activities for your RRW celebration.


My Top Counseling Tools for 2013-14
Although this post is almost four years old (yikes), it still has a lot of great tech tools to incorporate in your counseling practice. 
Creating Comfort Kits for Students who Self Harm
 
One of my latest blog post that shares how to create a comfort kit for students who self harm.  I got this information from the Georgia School Counselor Conference and had to share!


End of the Year Tips for the Overworked School Counselor






In this post, I share some tips on how to reduce end of the year stress during the craziest time of the year. Hint, exercise and music are part of answer!


Teen Hygiene Issues: Tips for School Counselors


Need tips to help students who have hygiene issues?  This blog gives some of the best tips I have discovered as a school counselor.

Coloring for Teens: Coloring Books for Teens

Need comforting and stress reducing tips for your students? Try coloring!  This blog post provides you with information to free and low cost options for your students. 


 Self Injury Resources for the Clueless School Counselor

This blog post was written to help school counselors who feel they do not have the knowledge or experience to assist students who self harm.  I try to provide lots of information, resources, and training suggestions.  

School Counselor Bucket List for High School Counselor

I really enjoyed writing this blog post about some fun things you should consider doing for your seniors before they graduate.

175 High School Counseling Websites and Resources
 Do you need a counseling website or resource?  Well, this post has everything and it continues to grow!  If you have an additional resource to add, please let me know!!


And now....




The Ultimate List of School Counseling Forms 

Yes, this post really has over 1,000 forms that you can use, modify, and borrow.  It is a great resource for any school counselor.
Looking forward to giving you more information, resources, and ideas in 2017!!