In the words of Vincent Furnier (aka Alice Cooper) "Schools Out for Summer"!  Here is the song in case you have never heard it...it is an anthem for me every year!!!
 
So, now many of us are looking to make plans for vacation, deep cleaning our homes, hanging by the pool, catching up on our summer reading, or binge watching our favorite shows on Netflix. Although I am working some this summer, I already have a packed summer!  I always try to have one trip planned (self care is really important), but I know this is my chance to improve my learning and sharpen my skills.  Whether you are looking for professional development opportunities from the comfort of your home or to physically go to a conference, this post is for you!!!

And now the list...

The conference of conferences for school counselors!!

American School Counseling Conference

ASCA
July 9-12, 2016
New Orleans, LA

Can't make the conference?  Be  a virtual attendee!!

Register here. 








ASCA University

ASCA University






Specialist Certifications:

Bullying Prevention Specialist
Bullying is a difficult issue that students can face in any school, and school counselors are often the first person students or parents contact when bullying happens. Earn the ASCA Bullying Prevention Specialist designation to be best prepared to prevent bullying or intervene when bullying occurs.
College Admission Specialist
The world of college admissions can be a confusing one, and often school counselors haven't received any training in this arena. Earn the ASCA College Admissions Specialist designation to be best prepared to help your students on the path to postsecondary success.
Legal/Ethical Specialist
School counselors face legal and ethical challenges every day. From confidentiality issues to records maintenance, from duty of care to sexual harassment issues, a school counselor's legal and ethical questions can spring up from every corner. Earn the ASCA Legal & Ethical Specialist designation to master these difficult subjects.
School Counseling Data Specialist
Collecting and analyzing data can help school counselors and their administrators identify achievement gaps, understand educational issues and assess programs to ensure they are making a difference for all students. 
School Counseling Leadership Specialist
Most school counselors don’t consider themselves to be leaders. However, we all know school counselors who are highly effective at their jobs. What sets them apart from others is leadership. Earn the School Counselor Leadership Specialist designation to ensure you are the best school counselor you can be for your students.

ASCA Webinar Series

2016 ASCA Webinar Series

Solving our Stress: How to Quickly See the Invisible - June 29th
 Learn how the innovative tool, Solving Our Stress, can help you visually chart students’ stress levels and create patterns of internal processes. This allows you to know the impact of your work before the student, parent or staff member leaves your office. The Solving Our Stress tool provides an “in” sight into emotions, in a manner similar to the recent Disney movie “Inside Out.” The tool positions traditionally imperceptible information into a visual format, improves your ability to foster mental wellness and therefore enhances safety in your school.

Promote Your Program - August 24th
A new school year is starting. Are you ready to promote your school counseling program? Toot your horn loud and clear, and let others know about the valuable work you do every day to have a positive impact on students. Learn how you can use various forms of public relations to help get the word out about your counseling program.

Child Sexual Abuse

Child Sexual Abuse Training  

College Board

College Board On Demand Webinars

These links/videos are still active and has great information!  Some topics include:
Common Application
NCAA Eligibility
Middle to High Transition
College Awareness
SAT Preparation
Financial Aid
Successful Principal-Counselor Teams

Crisis and Trauma

Crisis and Trauma Institute
Great site for resources, free handouts, and webinars

Data Boot Camp

Data Boot Camp

Dr. Russ Sabella



 











Digital Citizenship

Digital Citizenship
K-12 Online Curriculum Training

Establishing a Peer Helping Program

Establishing a Peer Helping Program
June 16-17, 2016
San Francisco, CA

Establishing a Peer Helping Program
June 20-24, 2016
Lindwood University
St. Charles, MO

Girl Bullying

Girl Bullying Conference

June 19-22, 2016
Atlanta, GA

Las Vegas, NV
June 28-July 1

 







GLSEN

GLSEN Webinars

High Schools That Work

High School That Works Staff Development Conference
July 13-16, 2016
Louisville, KY

Homeless Education

Homeless Education Self Paced Webinars 

Innovative School Counseling Conference

Innovative School Counseling Conference
June 19-22, 2016
Atlanta, GA

International School Counselor Conference

International School Counselor Conference: Introduction to Essential Skills
July 5-9, 2016
Miami, FL

National School Safety

National School Safety Conference
July 25-229, 2016
Orlando, FL

National Association of Peer Program Professionals: Peer Helping Institute

NAPPP Summer Institute: How to Train Peer Helpers, Evaluate Peer Programs, and Become a Trainer of Peer Program Adults 
June 28 -- July 2, 2016, 9:00 AM -- 5:00 PM daily
Indianapolis, IN

 








Next Gen School Safety & Crisis 

Next Gen School Safety & Crisis Prevention Conference
June 29-July 1
Las Vegas, GA

 




Reaching the Wounded Student
 
Reaching the Wounded Student Conference
June 26-29, 2016 
Orlando, FL












Red Cross

Red Cross Disaster Training 

SAFE Alternatives to Self Harm

SAFE Alternatives Webinars
Great information for parents and school counselors

School Counselor Summer College Tours

Pacific Northwest College Tour
June 21-26, 2016

Summer Sweet Tea College Tour
Georgia Schools
June 11-17, 2016

Sex Trafficking

Sexual Trafficking Webinars
Webinars for medical and counseling professionals

Social Emotional Learning

Social Emotional Learning Conference
July 14-15, 2016
Nashville, TN

State School Counseling Conferences

Arkansas School Counseling Conference
July 18-20, 2016
Hot Springs, AK

Wyoming School Counseling Conference
August 5-8, 2016
Casper, WY

Suicide Awareness

Suicide Prevention Resource Center
Free courses on many topics

Wired Differently

Wired Differently
June 29-July 2, 2016
Las Vegas, NV 

Youth Mental Health First Aid
  
Youth Mental Health First Aid Training
8 hour training for professionals who work with youth 













Also, check out my counselor university page for more webinars and resources!!!