If you enjoy Twitter chats, like me, you may be interested in this one! Join me and my friend, Emily Lindin from the "UnSlut Project", for a chat on dating and sexual violence among teens sponsored by the Association for Conflict Resolution.  

The Event

Dating Violence Awareness Twitter Chat

February 10, 2015

8:30 PM EST

#sexualbullying


More About Emily and The UnSlut Project

UnSlut Project 

The UnSlut Project promotes awareness about sexual bullying, slut shaming, and other related issues.  The project started in 2013 and has been featured on The Katie Couric Show, HLN, and NPR. Also,  Emily was named as Glamour's Hero of the Week in 2013!

Association for Conflict Resolution

The Association for Conflict Resolution is a national association for mediators, arbitrators, educators, and other conflict resolution practitioners. ACR works in a wide range of settings throughout the US and around the world.

The Education, Research, and Training Section of the Association for Conflict Resolution is sponsoring its first chat on Twitter.  The ERT section is responsible for providing resources, training, and support for practitioners, educators, students and young people, trainers, community activists, and administrators in the fields of peace and conflict resolution.  

Dating Violence Awareness Resources:

Teen Dating Violence Awareness - activities and resources to use in your school.

Centers for Disease Control - Healthy relationships.

Love What's Real -Toolkit from Idaho Coalition Against Domestic Violence.

Love Is Respect - Safety kit for teens.

That's Not Cool Ambassador Program 

Preventing and Responding to Dating Violence

Runaway and Homeless Youth Relationship Violence Toolkit

Breaking the Cycle - Warning signs of dating violence.

Healthy Relationships

Lesson Plans - Grades 6 - 12

Healthfinder - School Proclamation

Indiana Coalition Against Domestic Violence - List of resources and activities.

Activities for High School Students  - Grades 9 - 12.

Posters