I am so excited that I was invited by the Texas Conflict Coach, Pattie Porter, to speak about youth mental health and its impact on conflict in teens on her blog radio show. I have been a big fan of Pattie for several years and I finally got the privilege of meeting her in Cincinnati at the Association for Conflict Resolution Conference last October.  Pattie interviewed me last week for her show and the interview will air tomorrow evening, August 11th, at 7:00 PM CST on the Texas Conflict Coach Radio Show.

I hope you will listen to my show and join Pattie every Tuesday evening!!

Pattie Porter

Pattie Porter,  LCSW, AAP is the President of Conflict Connections®, Inc. in San Antonio, TX. Pattie has worked extensively in the dispute resolution field for nearly 20 years providing mediation, team facilitation, negotiation training, and conflict management and abrasive leader coaching services to executives, businesses, government agencies and higher education institutions.
Pattie is a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) and holds the Advanced Practitioner-Workplace Mediator (AAP) designation from the Association for Conflict Resolution (ACR), the Credentialed Distinguished Mediator from the Texas Mediator Credentialing Association, and the CINERGY® certified advanced conflict coach and coach-mentor as recognized by the International Coach Federation (ICF). She is currently working on her accreditation from The Boss Whispering Institute® and is an adjunct faculty member in the graduate dispute resolution program at Southern Methodist University in Plano, Texas

Connect to my show!!

Listen to our PRE-RECORDED show on August 11th at 7:00pm CST at Blog Talk Radio. Guest Speaker is Dr. Cynthia Morton.

Mental health includes decision making, communication, and handling life’s pressure. When an adolescent has a mental health disorder, it may negatively impact the person’s ability to handle stress and interact with others. The National Advisory Mental Health Council estimates that 1 in 5 adolescents suffer from one or more mental disorders. Although mental illness can be mistaken as normal adolescent development, there are signs and symptoms that an adult can recognize. Recognizing these hidden mental health signs early can be important in preventing teen substance abuse, family conflicts, school violence, or even suicide in teens