It is hard to believe that this is my fifth year anniversary for my blog!!!  Since its inception, my blog has been just a method for sharing my reflections, experiences, and thoughts with other high school counselors.  Maybe this will be the year for some expansion and graphic changes...who knows???  So to celebrate my anniversary, I decided to give a shout out to the other blogs that I regularly frequent and read.  I love each of these blogs for many different reasons, but they all have one thread in common...committed authors who love sharing with other school counselors.  I hope you will visit each blog and find some great resources, ideas, or even products to use in your practice.


My Top School Counseling Blogs for 2018

College Counselor Traci-I love Traci's creative posts, resources, and products.  Traci, a junior college counselor, has a gift for creating helpful resources and making exclusive products for school counselors.

Confident Counselor's Connection- Check out this monthly roundup of resources, products, best practices, articles, comic relief, blog posts, giveaways, and ideas in action . This blog is a labor of love by 20 counselor bloggers!!

Counselor's Corner-High School counselor Patrick O'Connor's blog contains great information for high school counselors and high school students. I am always impressed by his insightful posts!

Erin Luong's Reflection on Counselling, Education, Leadership, and Technology-Blog written by Alberta, Canadian school counsellor, Erin Luong.  Erin writes on a wide variety of subjects!

Franciene Sabens-School Counselor Space-Illinois High School Counselor of the Year who has a lot of great resources for professional school counselors! Franciene always has practical tips and information that can be employed in your practice.

The Middle School Counselor-Inspiring blog written by the New York School Counselor of the Year and former high school counselor, Carol Miller.  Although not a high school blog, Carol has a great blog with ideas that can be used with high school students.  In addition to her blog, Carol creates and sells school counseling t-shirts on her site (check them out!).

Susan Spellman Cann-School Counsellor Talk-Retired Canadian school counselor and psychologist who hosts a variety of chats (#ETMOOC &  #SCCrowd) and provides a lot of digital resources for professional school counselors.

The College Solution -Although this blog is not written by a high school counselor or educator, it is definitely worth your time to look at this site by Lynn O’Shaughnessy.  She is a former news reporter who writes about "all things college" from financial aid, party schools, standardized testing, and much more!

The Counseling Geek-Outstanding website created by California high school counselor and technology guru, Jeff Ream. The goal of the website is to help school counselors with their technology needs.  In addition to helping counselors with their technology needs, Jeff has set up the ASCA Scholarship fund. 

The Helpful School Counselor-Not only does Heather have well written posts, but she even offers staff development courses for school counselors.  Her latest course on Relational Aggression gives school counselors helpful information to promote social emotional learning among students.

School Counselor Central - Blog managed by Dean Pacchiana and Dr. Deborah Hardy which posts weekly ideas as lessons and activities.  In addition to the blog, SCC has a Facebook and Pinterest page!!

Although these are my favorites, there are many other great blogs for elementary and middle school counselors.  Check out other blog favorites from some of my counseling colleagues and authors.

Feedspot

Feedspot authors regularly update and feature many popular school counseling blogs on its site. Check out their post on the top 60 school counselor blogs!

Masters in School Counseling

Beside featuring only school counseling blogs, Barbara LoFrisco complied a list of her top 50 counseling sites.  There is a lot of diversity on this list!

Online Counseling Programs

Check out the Online Counseling Programs top school counseling blog list for 2017.

SCOPE Blog Roll 

Professor Erin Mason features popular blogs written by professional school counselors from all levels.

The Counseling Geek

Author Jeff Ream recently authored a post about his eight favorite blogs on his popular blog.

As always, thank you for reading my blog!!