Barbara Roberts
Each day our brains are exposed to many useless facts. For instance, did you know that...

Barbie's real name is Barbara Millicent Roberts (oy...no wonder they shortened it to Barbie).
Every time you lick a stamp, you consume 1/10 of a calorie (so much for my diet).
It is illegal to hunt camels in Arizona.
If you hold your nose, it is impossible to hum (it is really is true...I tried it!)
Guess what....never mind.
(sources: WiseGeek, DJ Tech, & Buzz Feed)





Even if they may seem trivial, here are some facts that are helpful to know.

Drugs and alcohol have a negative impact on the developing brain of a teen,
50% of teens do not believe it is harmful to experiment with
Potent THC Products
crack or cocaine.
6.5% of seniors smoke marijuana daily.
Current levels of THC in marijuana are much higher and much more dangerous than the levels in the 1970's. 
If these are the facts that you want to expose to your students, then you need to consider participating in Drug Fact Awareness Week!



(sources: Do Something-11 Facts About Teens & Drug Use and Teen Advice)

What is National Drugs Fact Awareness Week?

The purpose of National Drugs Fact Awareness Week is to debunk myths about drugs and drug abuse.

Date of Event

January 26-February 1, 2015

Preparing for National Drugs Fact Awareness Week
, 
Did you know that you can order free materials for your event?  Order your free materials until January 15th. I received my materials today!!

Also, check out the SAMSHA website for additional drug facts and pamphlets and the Truth About Drugs website for free downloads.

Planning for your Event

NIDA provides interactive lessons, worksheets, and materials for schools.  One event that I am going to host is a discussion/lesson on marijuana use by teens in our freshman health class. 

Publicizing your Event


Publicity Video




Teen Drug Trends



Drug Use Among Teens



Resources

Here are some links where you can get additional facts about drugs and drug use among teens.


Drug Facts - List of different drugs and their impact on the body and brain.



Downloads - Get decals for posters, t-shirts, & stickers. See two examples below...



Poster




T-Shirt



Other Resources

Above the Influence - Great organization for getting more information on teen drug use.

Some Examples of Events to Implement in Your School

1.  Teach a lesson-Below are a few lessons that are available along with quizzes and worksheets.

Marijuana
Prescription Drugs
Brain and Addiction

2.  Participate in the NIDA Drug Fact Chat on January 30, 2015 (8:00 am - 5:00 pm)- live chat between high school teens and scientists.

Drug Chat Transcripts (2007-2014) - includes questions asked by students, responses from scientists, and links for more information.


Short video regarding the 2013 Drug Fact Chat



Please feel free to share your ideas about Drug Fact Awareness Week with me!  