In exactly seven days, summer will be here!!  While I have plans for relaxation, it is also a time for learning.  Each year, I meticulously plan my summer staff development which often includes potential training, conferences, webinars, and recommended books.  This summer I will not be not be able to attend any conferences, due to my busy schedule and limited funds, but I have a lot of books that I plan to read and incorporate into my practice.  So, I would like to share my list of recommended summer readings for high school counselors.  As always, if you have additional recommendations, please SHARE!!

My Recommended List of Books for High School Counselors


Author and Social Worker, Bill Eddy, has written about a technique that can be applied in any type of communication (email, texts, verbal communication, etc.). This technique can help school counselors get along with difficult parents, staff members, and others anywhere in the workplace or in life..
This technique, known as BIFF, was designed to help anyone respond quickly and civilly to those who treat them rudely. BIFF stands for Brief, Informative, Friendly, and Firm. Eddy's book gives over 20 examples of BIFF responses and additional tips to help people deal with high-conflict individuals.
You can use this method to help your students with a BIFF response – by asking 10 simple questions to make it even more effective.


This book provides a complete introduction to implementing cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) with 6- to 18-year-olds. The book includes the following information:

*Incorporates the latest advances in CBT with youth and gives increased attention to cultural issues.
*Chapter on working with patients with autism spectrum disorder.
*Chapter on cognitive-behavioral family therapy.
*Pull-out boxes throughout that summarize key points.
*Epilogue on developing clinical wisdom.

The book also includes reproducible forms and handouts.



Great book for those who work with students with mental illness. This book chronicles the story of a teen who survived a fall from the Golden Gate Bridge. 




Use data to make a difference in your school counseling programs! Hatch's book will show school counselors how to:
Develop a robust counseling curriculum that supports the Common Core Standards and drop-out prevention
Replace “random acts of guidance” with intentional, well-timed interventions that are based on student needs
Measure progress through pre- and post-assessments
Deliver compelling reports that demonstrate your program’s impact


Impact Therapy is a form of brief therapy that emphasizes making counseling sessions clear, concrete and thought provoking. I want to know more!!


MENTAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS FOR SCHOOLS provides a collaborative "how to" guide for both preventive and intervention-oriented counseling in school settings. The book covers disorders that can negatively impact learning.





Written by a real-life School Counselor, this book helps School Counselors learn to use Motivation Interviewing as a counseling technique.



This book explains what has to happen in a school in order for it to become truly restorative. Divided into three sections, the book provides an overview of restorative practice in schools, examines the process of understanding and managing change, and provides steps for achieving a restorative culture
.


Bill Eddy lays out a simple, proven method to shift the conversation from the past and blame, to the future and problem solving in just 30 seconds. What‘s more, almost anyone can use it, school counselors, students, staff members, etc.



See how the tenets of Nonviolent Communication are applied to the school environment. This book provides exercises, sample stories, and role-playing activities for the reader.

Other Recommended Sites for High School Counselors Regarding Suggested Summer Reading

Books School Counselors Should Read Over the Summer by The Helpful School Counselor

Counselor Created

Extraordinary School Counselor

Macro Products

Research Press

School Counselor Resources

Youth Light

Past Posts from My Blog With Summer Suggestions

Back to School Counseling Shopping

For High School Counselors: Summer Reading