One of the best things about being a school counselor is that we are a community of like-minded souls who love to share our ideas, resources, and expertise with one another!  With the explosion of social media, there are lots of ways you can connect with other school counselors across the globe!  Below is a list of just some of the great sites you can join to connect with other school counselor in our awesome field.

Facebook Groups

K-12 Counselor Exchange -  "A place for superhero school counselors who (somehow) manage all grade levels in his or her district. A place to share resources, concerns, and ideas with one another. Please join!"

High School Counselors' Network - "A place for high school counselors to network, share ideas, ask questions, etc."

School Counselors on the Perimeter - "This is a place for those of us in alternative settings/schools to share ideas, resources, frustrations, etc."

The School Counselor Store  - "A place for counselors to share their resources with other counselors" By the way, this group just started last week and is already grown to over 500 counselors!

Peer Program Network  - "Network of former, current, and future peer program coordinators and trainers. The purpose of the group is to share ideas about starting, improving, or expanding school peer helping programs."

Peer Mediation Programs  - "The Peer Mediation Programs site welcomes collaboration, information regarding mediation training, and helpful resources for existing and new peer mediation programs in schools."

Conflict Resolution Education in Teacher Education  - " Site to share information, training, and resources for conflict resolution education!"

Google+ Groups

Professional School Counseling - "The Professional School Counseling community is the first G+ community for all involved with the field of School Counseling."

Counselor Connect - "This is an open community sponsored by the Indiana Online Academy and the Central Indiana Educational Service Center. It is a place for school counselors from across the globe to share resources, collaborate, and learn. All posts should benefit the members of the community. Welcome to Counselor Connect!"

Google Apps for School Counselors  - "This community was created for school counselors to leverage technology resources with school counseling curriculum in order to create enriching lesson plans and enhance what school counselors do for their school."

Peer Programs  - "Community of peer program professionals sharing resources, information, and expertise. All are welcome to join this community whether you are an expert or novice looking for new ideas!"

Peer Mediation Programs  - "This community supports conflict educators who have or want to create a sustainable peer mediation program in their schools. All members are invited to share their resources, ideas, conflict training skills, and creativity with the community."

Twitter

#hscchat - High School Counselor Chat hosted by Amber Shepherd  - chat will be the second Monday of every month.

#scNOTaluxury - New School Counselor Chat hosted by Shujuan Hill Shannon.

#scchat  - School Counseling Chat

#etmooc - Chat about educational technology

#sccrowd - School Counselor Crowd - Q & A Day for school counselors-This is an awesome live chat moderated by Ross Wolfson and Susan Spellman Cann every third Tuesday from 8:30-9:30 EST.  Find resources to help in your school practice; get answers to complex situations; or find out if others are facing the same situations you may face in your school.

Pinterest

School Counseling Pinterest Boards  - Shared by Tracy Jackson
(Truly the mother-lode of all things school counseling!)

School Counseling Blog  by Danielle Schultz

High School Counseling

High School and Middle School Counseling by Jenny Vowell

School Counselors on Pinterest by Susan Spellman Cann

Livebinders

School Counseling Livebinders - A plethora of livebinders shared by Tracy Jackson.

You Tube

School Counseling On Air - Series of school counseling topics hosted by Jeff Ream (aka The Counseling Geek).

The Counseling Geek  - Another great series of videos about technology for school counselors.

One Tool at a Time - A series about different technology tools for school counselors hosted by Erin Mason.

Russ Sabella - Great series of videos about how to use technology in school counseling.