It's been a very busy month so I have not had a lot of free time to post on the "For High School Counselor" blog. However, I want to share some of the great activities that I have been involved in this month!


Since February is Dating Violence Awareness Month, it was important to me and my students to educate our students.  We downloaded some free materials from Mary Kay and then participated in a "Orange Out" campaign during the week of Valentine's Day.  

Orange Out 

On Valentine's Day, we made "bling rings" and sold them to raise money for dating violence awareness materials for next year.  I found some great instructions on how to make a ring on Pinterest from "Mom on Time Out". They were a great hit with the the students and staff! 

Here are the directions:


Lay two pipe cleaners perpendicular to each other and twist them into an "X".


Here is the "X"
Place the Hershey Kiss in the center of the pipe cleaners.

Twist the pipe cleaners at the top of the candy.


Here is what it looks like when you pull the pipe cleaners apart.
Wrap the pipe cleaner around your finger.


Twist the pipe cleaner around the base of the ring.
The result!  How cute!


After our Dating Violence Awareness Campaign, I headed out to the National Peer Helper Conference sponsored by the Jennifer Claire Moore Foundation and the National Association of Peer Program Professionals in beautiful Point Clear Alabama.  


The conference was three days and there were many great trainers and speakers. Some workshops included: training adults in basic and advanced peer helping by Dr. Judith Tindall and Julie Champion; information about improving your peer mediation program; bully awareness training; implementing peer helping activities; peer mentoring; peer tutoring; peer helping program evaluation; grant writing; how to be an effective trainer; and a great session on working with different personalities. During the closing session, the National Peer Program Professional Organization honored the National School Counselor of the Year, Robin Zorn!

Take a look at some of the features of the conference from my eyes.

Mobile Bay
Path down the beach...this was right out of my room.

Inside the hotel. We had tea at 4 pm everyday!
Me, my secretary (Tamecia), Robin Zorn (aka "Counselor of the Year), and my colleague (Deidre) going out for seafood!
Well, February is not over and there is lots more to do and accomplish.  Our department will start meeting with parents and students for senior registration, we have a Peer Mediation Graduation, and we will wrap up the month with a parent night.  

So, how is your February?  