It is that time again-the Super Bowl!  A fun time when families and friends sit around the television and watch hours of grid-iron action, creative commercials, and the hottest musicians perform their latest hits.  This year, my favorite part of the festivities will be the Key and Peele East v. West Pro Edition video. Now if you are not familiar with Key and Peele, you need to ask your students about their show on Comedy Central (a word of caution...some of their videos are not school counselor friendly).  Key and Peele have several skits where they portray themselves as football players from various colleges around the United States.  As the players introduce themselves, they have some of the most unusual names ever.  For instance, here are some of my favorite!

East 

Jackmerius Tacktheritrax- Michigan State University
Javarius Jamar Javariuson-Lamar - Middle Tennessee
Talk about a creative introduction!
Xmus Jaxon Flaxon-Waxon  -Univ. of Pennsylvania

West

Saggitariutt Jefferspin- Texas AM
Sequester Grundelplith - Adam State


Okay, what does this have to do with school counselors?  Well, I guess to make a point.  These introductions are creative, stand out and are memorable.  So, the question to school counselors is how can we become memorable to our students and staff?  There is one time each year we have the privilege of standing out to our school and it happens next week!  It may be a little too late to think of something over the top, but there are some simple things you can do next week.  

Simple Ideas for NSCW15

Create an eye-catching bulletin board


Put out a daily message to students


The Middle School Counselor Blog


Host a Staff Breakfast
High School Counselor Clique Blog


Give treats to your staff
Inspired Counselor Blog

NSCW15 Kit

NSCW15 Week Activities 

Download and create your own message!!


Download the NSCW15 kit from ASCA and check out last year's NSCW14  for more ideas. 

Can't wait to see all the creative ways that school counselors celebrate this week!!