October is bullying awareness month and there are lots of opportunities to support students and bring awareness to this issue that impacts so many students. 

10-5-15 
Blue Shirt Day 
Start the month of October by encouraging students to wear blue to stomp out bullying.

 10-13-15
Encourage leadership at your school by promoting the "Let's Make a New Friend" campaign.  Give your students ideas about how to make a friend with a peer at their school who they do not know.  Some ideas include inviting that student to an after school activity or club meeting; asking him/her to sit with them at lunch; or starting a conversation with someone who sits alone on the bus.

10-21-15
Unity Day
Encourage students to wear orange to take a stand against bullying.  Take photos and post them to Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook using #UnityDay2015. Also, get the staff involved in the campaign by asking them to wear an orange ribbons during the day.  

You can order additional shirts designed by celebrities at this link!
Here is one that I like for myself created by actress Allison Stoner!!

Some additional activities from PACERS includes:
You are Not Alone Kit - toolkit that can assist you in creating schools where students feel empowered.
Educational videos by teens and experts - educate students on what to say to bullies and bystanders.  This page includes a quiz and additional resources.
Digital Petition - Have your students go to this link to sign  the petition to stand against bullying at their school. 
Project Connect - Create an orange unity chain and put up your cafeteria or another high visibility area.
Create a school wide unity banner and have students to sign it. Here is one that you can order from PACERS.




10-27-15
 Make kindness go viral by participating in acts of kindness in your school like posting positive messages in the bathroom, lockers, and in the hallways. 

Need more ideas? 
Check out this Educator Informational page from STOMP Out Bullying. 
From the For High School Counselors Blog:
Check out my post from 2013 for additional ideas, links and resources. Also, check out my blog on the importance of helping those who are bullied. 

Hope you got some good ideas, but please feel free to share your ideas with me as well!!



 