If you feel suicidal or very depressed call your local crisis line number. If you have plans to commit suicide call 911 or have someone take you to your local emergency room. Almost every large city has a crisis line number.
1-800-SUICIDE / 1-800-784-2433. 1-800-273-TALK / 1-800-273-8255. You can also pull up SuicideHotlines.com and on the bottom of the site it lists hot lines in your state.
Suicidal thoughts usually last only a short time, sometimes minutes or a few hours. Now is not forever.
Be with friends, family or a neighbor.
Hug a puppy.
Sing.
Dance.
Sometimes drinking a tiny bit of salt water can help. One-fourth teaspoon to 6 ounces of water.
Pinch your nose. Alternate pinching the nose as you breath, right breathe, pinch,left nose pinch, breathe, and continue.
Try deep breathing.


Raising Serotonin Levels

Say “Cheese,” use your smile muscles. The brain can’t tell the difference between a real smile and a phony smile. Smiling and laughing both raise serotonin levels.

Walk in the sunshine or on a cloudy day get a sun tan.

Exercise-walk, swim, dance, jog, biking, jump on a mini trampoline, do Thai Chi or yoga.

Help Eliminate Depression by:

Expressing Gratitude. Write down five things you are grateful for each day.

Help Others

Positive Affirmations: download at www.healingyourspirit.com. "Thanks God (or higher power) for helping me through this," say this over and over.

Journaling: Write down your feelings and write about the things that are causing you stress or depression. Consider rewriting your situation as you would like it to be.

Books: Defeating Depression & Beating the Blues by Webb
"Depression Free for Life," by Gary Null
Attitude of Gratitude
"What Your Doctor May Not Tell You About Depression." Michael B. Schachter, M.D.
For every problem under the sun,
There is a remedy or there is none.
If there be one hurry and find it—
If there be none, never mind it.

“If we realize that what we think about becomes our reality, we become very careful about what we think about.” Wayne Dyer


You cannot keep the birds of sadness
From flying over your head
But you can keep them from
Nesting in your hair.