Vitamin D 3


According to Dr. Robert O. Young, Director of Research at the pH Miracle Living center, "recommendations for an "adequate intake" of vitamin D should be at 50,000 IU's for maintanance and 100,000 IU's in any acute or chronic condition, including diabetes, MS, heart disease and cancerous conditions."

Scientific evidence shows vitamin D may go beyond its traditionally known role in maintaining bone integrity, according to new research presented at the Institute of Food Technologists Annual Meeting and Food Expo® earlier this month. It may play a role in preventing autoimmune diseases or over-acid tissue conditions such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, some types of cancerous conditions such as breast, ovarian, colorectal and prostate.
Advancing technologies to add vitamin D to natural foods create offerings that provide excellent sources of both vitamin D and calcium which can help consumers achieve dietary adequacy of these largely under-consumed nutrients.

Recent headlines tout vitamin D as the new wonder supplement, with claims ranging from its ability to reduce cancer risk to its link to cognitive function in older men. While studies show connections exist, experts debate the amount of vitamin D necessary for optimal health, however..
"Low vitamin D status is linked to a number of different conditions," said James C. Fleet, Ph.D. professor in the department of foods and nutrition at Purdue University. "These include certain cancers, muscle weakness and types I and II diabetes--possibly even schizophrenia and multiple sclerosis."

Muscle weakness in cases of low levels of vitamin D may be explained by muscle's low levels of vitamin D receptors. "Studies with mice show that without vitamin D receptors, cells can't absorb the vitamin," said Dr. Fleet. "Research also shows a correlation between high vitamin D status and improved lower body muscle function in men and women over 60 years old."
Studies also show a decrease in colon cancer with an increase in vitamin D status, and it seems protective against other acidic cancerous risks as well. "One theory is that vitamin D may indirectly inhibit pro-cancer pathways," said Fleet. "The question is finding the protective level, which remains under some debate."
As you can see, Dr. Young recommends a much higher level.
Although it remains controversial, 30 (ng/mL) of vitamin D is associated with fewer fractures and falls, according to Karen Hansen, assistant professor of medicine within the rheumatology section at the University of Wisconsin. "Vitamin D deficiency causes osteoporosis by triggering decreased calcium absorption, secondary hyperparathyroidism, increased bone resorption and decreased bone mineral density." Study variables and inconsistencies make further studies necessary. Currently, 700 to 800 International Units (IU) of vitamin D 3 a day seems most effective.
Vitamin D 3 and Schizophrenia
Several months ago I received a letter from Dr. Robert Young about Vitamin D research and I just want to share a few lines: "Low vitamin D status is linked to a number of different conditions," said James C. Fleet, Ph.D. professor in the department of foods and nutrition at Purdue University. "These include certain cancers, muscle weakness and types I and II diabetes--possibly even schizophrenia and multiple sclerosis."
What most interested me was the mention of schizophrenia. In my studies, there is some indication that bipolar disorder and some schizophrenia's have responded well to fish oil (The Omega 3 Connection by Dr. Andrew Stoll). Also, there is some research indicating that candida can contribute to both bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
Dr. Carl C. Pfieffer, a psychiatrist in the field of nutritional research, and author of the book,"Nutrition and Mental Illness," treated more than 25,000 mentally ill patients successfully with nutrition. Blood tests were taken to determine deficiencies in the patient.


Patty's comments:
My doctor has recommended that I take 3000 IU a day because I have low bone density. My husband's cardiologists has recommended that he take 4000 IU a day.
Consult your phycian