Ovarian Cancer Battle

It was on a journey with my daughter, who was recovering from surgery for Stage 3 Ovarian Cancer, to the pH Miracle Healing Center in Southern California that I learned lessons for life. It was a life and death journey. My daughter had cysts the size of a grapefruit and the size of an orange, a foot of her colon removed, her appendix removed and bladder tumors. The surgeon did an excellent job removing the tumors. But, I lost my 41 year-old son in February...I did not want to lose another child.
We arrived late at the ranch, and as we got out of the car we could actually see stars. The guest house was enchanting. They had a green salad for both of us and also a refrigerator loaded with containers of green juice and additional jars of fresh almond milk. The goal was to make my daughter's blood and tissues more alkaline, because cancer cannot survive in an alkaline environment.
The next morning we were up early for the exercise class. Since Shari was only six weeks away from the extensive six-hour surgery and her abdominal muscles were still tender, I wondered how she would do and watched her every move. It was me, her aging mother, who had to work to keep up with strenuous cardio and yoga exercises. It's important to exercise to break up the acids in your body and to get the lymph system going. Shari, a fitness instructer, kept up, but modified the stomach exercises. After class she was invigorated. I was still puffing.
Next, we all sat down to a breakfast of avacado shakes made with almond milk, cucumber, coconut meat, and fresh coconut water. There were green drinks made with spinach, celery, and cucumber and you could drink as much green juice as you wanted.
I was amazed at the stories from other patients..a mother who had a tumor larger than a golf ball, and in three weeks it was gone. Even after the x-rays her doctor would not believe it and wanted to redo the x-rays. An oncologist who had stage 4 pancreatic cancer was now in remission after being on the alkaline diet for six months.
For lunch there were vegetable soups made by gently frying onions and garlic for about five minutes, then adding a small amount of water, then a crown of broccoli, a half bunch of asparagus, a few chunks of cauliflower, and yellow squash, sea salt and spices to taste (no pepper). I like lots of dill and some basil. This is brought to a gentle boil, simmered for about twenty minutes, cooled between twenty minutes to an hour, then poured into a blender and vita mixer, and mixed to a creamy soup.
After six days I had lost six pounds, my daughter lost about ten, but even more than that the white yeast cells or maybe caner markers were cut in half. Tomography and ultra sound showed no tumors.
We both continued on the diet after we came home from the ranch, and in two weeks I had lost ten pounds. 1. Eat alkaline--avocado shakes 2. Drink lots of green drinks and water. celery 4-5 stalks, 2 cucumbers, 1/2 bag of spinach. 3. Green soups
At the present time, my daughters cancer marker is low and she is recovering. It is truly a miracle.