Some People are More at Risk for Suicide, what you need to understand and resources that are available.
Higher risk if any of the following...
Mental health issues such as
Depression...
Substance abuse disorder
Bipolar disorder
Schizophrenia and psychosis
High histamine,
Personality traits of aggression, mood changes,
and poor relationships
Conduct disorder
Anxety disorder
Serious or chronic health condition
Physical pain
Traumatic brain injury
Smoking.
Bad Gut flora (Read Gut and Psychology Syndrome: Natural Treatment for Autism, Dyspraxia, A.D.D., Dyslexia, A.D.H.D., Depression, Schizophrenia by MCBride)
MTHFR...a genetic mutation that prevents liver from detoxifying
https://www.verywell.com/the-link-between-mthfr-gene-mutati… Dr.Lynch has a book "MTHFR Basics."
Child abuse
Sexual abuse as a child or adult
Toxic Chemicals and drugs and alcohol
Addictions read "The Addicted Brain, by Hyla Cass M.D.
Prolonged Stress
Stressful life events
As a therapist I found that anger you turn in on yourself, feeling guilty, feeling trapped, and loss ..loss of love, loss of self-esteem, loss of love, and loss of control in your life can be precipitaitng factors. If you feel like you want to die, or think of suicide, call a crisis line...if you have a plan call immediately or call a counselor or go to the emergency room.
I have seen so many people overcome depression and even mental illness with nutrition, diet, elan light therapy, and therapy.
Books I really like are:
Nutrition and Mental Illness, by Dr. Carl Peiffer
My book, "Defeating Depression & beating the Blues," Pat Webb
Depression Free,Naturally
Louise Hays books. "Love Yourself, Heal Your Life." & "You Can Heal Your Life,"
Gut and Psychology Syndrome, by MCCabe
I do believe that most mental illness and depression begin in the gut.
Find a good probiotic
Fish oil is essential to prevent depression
Check out Elan Light Therapy and find a practitioner.
Find an Emotion Code Practitioner or buy the book "The Emotion Code," by Dr. Bradley Nelson and learn to do this yourself.
I will discuss more coping skills in later posts and also on my blog,
http://healingbodyspirit.blogspot.com/
Many factors play a role. Know the risks and ask the question. Are you having thoughts of suicide? There is help and hope♡ Call the lifeline 1 800 273 8255 check out this link
https://www.facebook.com/Utah-Chapter-for-the-American-Fo…/…
Don't give up hope...
Hope is the thing with feathers--
that perches in the soul---
And sings the tune without the words...
And never stops--- at all.
Emily Dickinson