Breaking Addiction by Rearranging Your Subcoscious Mind

Sometimes the drive to use drugs, alcohol, overeat or other addictive practices in our lives is an attempt to change one's consciousness or fill an inner emptiness.
As the negative behavior continues, negative neural pathways are actually created in the brain, leading to addictions that are hard to break.
In the book, "Kundalini Yoga," by by Shaktu Parwha Kaur Khalsa, there is a meditation that helps rearrange the subconscious mind and negative neural pathways.
According to Khalsa,imbalance in the area below the pineal gland upsets the pulsating radiance that regulates the pituitary gland. Since he pituitary regulates the rest of the glandular system, the entire body and mind go out of balance when the pineal gland is dormant. It is imbalance in this area that makes mental and physical addiction almost unbreakable. This meditation corrects the problem. It is excellent for everyone but has been particulary effective for rehabilitation efforts in drug and alcohol dependence, pornography, mental illness and phobic conditions.
Begin by writing down the mantra "SA TA NA MA," in large letters. Practice chanting the rhythm. Tape the mantra on the wall in front of you. Sit in a comfortable place and make sure the first six lower vertabrae are locked forward. Make fists or both hands and extend the thumbs out straight.Place your thumbs on the temples where there is a small indentation about and inch beyond the eyebrows The pressure exerted by the thumbs triggers a rhythmic reflex current directly under the stem of the pineal gland.
Lock the back molars together and keep the lips closed.Vibrate the jaw muscles by alternating the pressure on the back molars with the rhythm of SA TA NA MA. A muscle will move underneath the thumbs. Feel it massage the thumbs and apply a firm pressure with the hands. You shoul also feel the roof of your mouth vibrate. Continue 5 to 7 minutes, working up to 30 minutes over a period of daily pratice sessions.
Make a chart to check off this daily routine and how many minutes a day you
are performing this meditation. Human habit patterns are set or broken in 40 day-day cycles. More deeply ingrained patterns may take longerto correct.