I have just been reading "Building Wellness with DMG," written by Roger V. Kendell, and is a book I highly recommend.
DMG (N,N-Dimethylglycine) is a metabolic enhancer built from the simplest amino acid, glycine. DMG is a natural substance found in low levels of the body and is a safe hypoallergenic nutrient that prevents degeneration of the body.
In 1965, two Russian scientists published a study on mentally handicapped children and pangamate (which ocntaind DMG as its active ingredient). Twelve of the 15 children who had previously been unable to speak showed drastic improvement.In addition to increasing in vocabulary, they began speaking in sentences. The children improved mentally, had better concentration and were more interested in their environmnet. In 1975, Dr. Allen Cott published a similar paper with nine autistic children. In 1997, Dr. Shin-siong Jung did a double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 84 students.
The DMG group showed significantly significant Improvement on five scales used to measure the effictiveness of DMG: irritability, lethargy, stereotypy, inappropriate speech, and hyperactivity.
In a survey of 21,500 parents of autistic children conducted at the Autism Research Institute in San Diego, California, under the direction of Dr. Rimland, showed significant in regard to the use of DMG and behavior modification.
Stephen Edelson, Ph.D., Center for the Study of Autism in Salem, Oregon, says that DMG is safe, inexpensive, and helps half of all autistic individuals. DMG strengthens the immune system, decreases seizure activity, and helps with mental clarity. . Dr Rimland found that from 50 to 75 percent of individuals benefited from DMG.. Recommended dosage is 125 mg from one to four times a day for children, Start with one dose of 125 mg and gradually build up to four. Consult your doctor for specifics. .
Autism is linked to abnormal metabolism, an irregular immune system, and neurological dysfunction. Studies show that DMG helps in all of these areas.