Arthritis,
I overcame Arthritis over 30 years ago.
It was simple. I gave up sugar. I was in so much pain, I saw a I chiropractor once or twice a week. I could hardly walk, Every muscle and bone in my body ached. I couldn't exercise, walk up stairs, I couldn't sleep well because it hurt to move, my neck and shoulders always ached. I was miserable.
I remember him saying to me, "You need to give up sugar." At the time I thought, "Do you know who you are talking to?"
I was a... sugar addict. I loved brownies and candy bars. I didn't know what it meant to eat healthy. But....I did it and reversed my arthritis.
One tablespoon of sugar causes five hours of inflamation.
Today I have a Ph.D in Holistic Nutrition, I am over 80, jump on the trampoline every day and exercise and I don't have arthritis.
There are other things I would recommend if you have arthritis.
Take fish oil....3000 mg a day and I like Barlean's lemon swirl....it tastes like lemon pie.
I would take MSM which is a natural substance in your body, 1000 mg up to 4 times a day.
Magnesium (I like citrate) 3 400 mg a day.
Bromelain 2 or 3 a day.
I like T-relief for pain...a homepathic remedy and not hard on your kidneys or liver.
White willow is also good for pain. Tumeric has anti-inflamatory properites.
Change your diet. The more alkaline you eat, the less pain you will have and the healthier you will be.
Eat lost of green vegetables, broccoli, sprouts, sunflower sprouts, ,cucumber, brussel sprouts, cabbage, romaine lettuce, cauliflower,
Spinach,Squash,Tomato, Zucchini, bell peppers, jicama, lemons, limes, Avocado, Beets, nuts (soaked almonds), Hummus,Kamut
Millet, Olive oil, Quinoa. Allkinds of herbs.
Sprouted breads...avoid white lfour. Eat fish or turkey.Limit red meat
Beans, soba noodles. I use lemon juice an clod pressed olive oil on salads.
I like juicing or putting in a Vita Mixer, 4 or 5 stalks celery, 4 cups spinach and a cucumber (use a little water if using a mixer) and drinking this daily.
In addition, Epsom salts baths are helpful.
Exercising and movement are essential to break up lactic acid that causes pain...I have a vibration machine, but some gymns or health food stores have them too that you can use. Herbs for Health in West Jordan...they also sell alkaline water.
Elan light therapy is very helpful for pain, arthritis, and even depression. Omnipreseence has this light therapy in Salt Lake.
Use pressure points around your pain area to help releive pain. First use your finger to put pressure on points, then massage with your hands, then pat with your hands the points that are causing pain.
Deepr breatihing can help releave pain.
Look into ozone therapy....