There is evidence of a genetic link in autism and that link may be a compromised or weakended immune system.
According to Roger V. Kendall, author of "Building Wellness with DMG," 85 percent of children with autism have microbial overgrowth of viruses, yeast, and pathogens in their gut. "With an impaired digetive tract,food intolerances, allergies and microbial overgrowths result. If left untreated dysfunctional gastrointestional issues can further complicate neurological problems and worsen physical symptoms associated wtih autism."

Researchers have documented yeast overgrowths(Candida albicans) in the intestinal tract of autistic children. High levels of candida may be a contributing factor may to behabioral problems. When there are abnormal gut microbes, the yeast present in the intestinal tract can grow rapidly, and releses toxins in the brain. The toxins can then influence the functioning of the brain.

More Research
A case study found that a child with autism was found to have complete IgA deficiency (serum IgA <6 mg/dl; normal 33-235mg/dL), Candidiasis of the gastrointestinal tract based on evaluation of stool testing, elevated urine arabinose, and elevated serum antibodies to wheat and dairy products. “The pretreatment urinary arabinose concentration (341 mmol/mol creatine in this child was nearly six times the mean value (60.4 mmol/mol creatinine) of normal controls. After antifungal therapy for four months, the urine was retested. At the time the urine arabinose was measured at 51 mmol/mol creatinine, a value only 15% of the baseline sample. Restriction of wheat and dairy products from the diet and antifungal therapy led to a significant decrease in autistic behaviors and increased rate of learning. The Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS), an observational measure of various aspects of autism, for the child has decreased from a
rating of 43 (severely autistic) prior to introduction of these therapies to a value of 29 (non-autistic) after the therapy. (Shaw, Baptist, and Geenens)
“Studies done by the late Reed Warren Ph.D. at Utah State University and others indicate that most children with autism have a substantial immune abnormality. Konstantareas and Homatidis at the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada found a high correlation between the prevalence of ear infections and the incidence of autism. They found that the earlier a child had an ear infection, the more likely that child had a more severe form of autism. Candida infection has been reported as consequence of frequent antibiotic usage in both humans and animals and an abnormal increase in the sugar arabinose probably from Candida has been reported in urine samples of two siblings with autism. However, Candida infection may also be common in children with immodeficiencies who do not have an unusually high number of infections treated with antibiotics. The pattern of gastrointestinal Candida overgrowth, immunodeficiency, metabolic disorder and autism is well-illustrated in the medical history of the child evaluated by us.” (Shaw, Baptist, and Geenens)