An alkaline diet may be the answer for some who suffer from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, a debilitating disease that sometimes makes you feel like you’re going to die. More than 800,000 people in the US suffer from this disease.
Candida is a major player in fatigue. When our body is alkaline, candida, fungus, yeast, mold, parasites, viruses, and bacteria do not thrive. According to Dr. Robert Young, author of The pH Miracle, microforms are the major players in chronic fatigue syndrome. If your body is acidic, it is likely you have microforms. How do you know if your body is alkaline or acidic? Dr. Robert Young, suggests you use litmus paper (you can buy it a health food store) and get an indication of where the pH of the urine is by testing the first morning urine. Take a strip of the pH paper and wet it. If the paper does not change color, that indicates a highly acidic body. Urine should be 6.8 to 7.2 (medium green), if it too much color (dark blue) that also indicates highly acidic.
As I have researched and talked to people who have overcome Chronic Fatigue with an alkaline diet, I have been amazed at some of the results.
Carol, had chronic fatigue for 16 years and tried everything. At one time she was taking 55 capsules a day. “I had a fisherman’s tackle box to organize my supplements,” she told me. Although her health had started to improve three years ago, she claims it was the alkaline diet and green drinks (I now like AlkaVision) that “pushed me over the edge to good health.”
AlkaVision has a powdered green drink, but you can juice your own greens. I have a vita mixer and blend spinach, celery, kale, a small carrot, cucumber, a thin slice of ginger (natural antiseptic properties), parsley, a little red onion, favorite spices (I use Zip) and a cup of distilled water.
What are alkaline foods? Cucumbers, while not the most nutrient dense food, is one of the most alkaline foods you can eat. Include broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, brussel sprouts, avocados, jicima, lemon, limes, grapefruit and other alkaline foods in your diet.
Foods to avoid include all dairy, meat, most processed foods, soft drinks, sugar, most sweeteners (except Stevia), and white flour.
I have found that most people who eat green, alkaline foods in the morning have almost double the energy of those on the Standard American Diet, (SAD)