Every day I hear of more and more people who have cancer. Today a friend told me of her relative who had colon cancer. After her surgery her doctor recommended chemotherapy as a preventative measure. She had a devastating reaction to the chemo and has been in the hospital for a month now. I think the day will come that we will view chemotherapy as barbaric as bloodletting.

    " Several thousand years ago, whether you were an Egyptian with migraines or a feverish Greek, chances are your doctor would try one first-line treatment before all others: bloodletting. He  would open a vein with a lancet or sharpened piece of wood, causing blood to flow out and into a waiting receptacle. If you got lucky, leeches might perform the gruesome task in place of crude instruments.
 In 1799, George Washington awoke with a bad sore throat and began to decline rapidly. A proponent of bloodletting, he asked to be bled the next day, and physicians drained an estimated 5 to 7 pints in less than 16 hours. Despite their best efforts, Washington died the next day, leading to speculation that excessive blood loss contributed to his demise."

   Please do all you can to prevent cancer. Read "The China Study," by T. Collin Campbell, view the video, "Forks Over Knives," and the new book "The pH Miracle for Cancer," by Dr. Robert Young.
More than twenty years ago I had chronic fatigue for more than five years. I recovered, but my immune system was fragile. Within a short time I found out I had liver cancer. My doctor knew, and I knew, I could not do chemotherapy. It would have killed me. He put me on a vegan diet and I have remained vegan all of hose years. Cancer cannot survive in an alkaline environment.

Prevent cancer by reducing stress, exercising and sweating to remove toxins from your body, and eating an alkaline diet. Remember, sugar feeds cancer. I just read this excerpt today," Controlling the body's systemic pH balance during a person's life, using either an alkalinizing diet and/or buffering strategies, may help a lot in preventing the vast majority of diseases, including cancer. By the same token therapies based on alkalization may help in curing or at least stabilizing many incurable diseases, including a global nightmare such as cancer today. The pH Miracle for Cancer will help in understanding more on this issue."
Stefano Fais, MD, PhD, Head Anti-Tumor Drug Section, The National Institute of Health

Check out my older blogs for a healing cleansing alkaline diet.
 