I am  certified in the Emotion Code and have completed more than 140 sessions of releasing trapped emotions. So, what are trapped emotions and what is the "emotion code"?
     Dr. Bradley Nelson, author of the book, "The Emotion Code," states, "" The Emotion Code is an energy healing technique that helps us to identify and literally release trapped emotions- which are harmful emotional energies from negative past events. Trapped emotions can cause depression, anxiety, they can block people from love and happiness and make them feel disconnected from others. And because trapped emotions are made of energy, just like the rest of the body, they exert an influence on the physical tissues, and can cause acute pain and even cancer. Releasing trapped emotions makes conditions right for the body to heal- so physical and emotional difficulties often disappear or become much more manageable."

"Just about everyone has some amount of emotional baggage from painful life events, right? It's not all in your head! Emotional baggage is very real, and although it's invisible it can really mess up your happiness, your success and your health. It's like lugging around a suitcase from every difficult event you've gone through- eventually the load gets too heavy not to notice. I call each "suitcase" a Trapped Emotion- a bit of emotional energy that was created, by you, during an emotional event, and got stuck in your body somewhere."

"Trapped Emotions are literally like balls of energy, vibrating at different frequencies depending on what the emotion is (for example, Anger is a different vibration than Sadness or Insecurity). Trapped Emotions are negative, destructive vibrations, and tend to affect the body wherever they are stuck, creating pain and malfunction of bodily tissues, even disease. They can also cause depression, anxiety and loads of emotional problems. Trapped Emotions sure can make life miserable, but you can get rid of them using The Emotion Code."

    So far I have worked on mainly humans, but you can also release trapped emotions from animals. A friend called me about her dog, who has carpral syndrome in her legs...similar to carpral tunnel in humans. He dog could barely walk. After releasing the trapped emotions, my friend reported that her dog was walking much better by the very next day.
    I have seen symptoms of severe depression disipate from a severe ten down to a two in just one session. I am a Licensed Professional Counselor, do clinical hypnossis, but the Emotion code is so much faster and efficient.