Obsessive compulsive Disorder (OCD) can be treated without drugs. In an article by Juririan Plesman, who describes the cause of OCD by excess secretion of adrenaline, the fight/flight hormone. Adrenaline is also the hormone that in case of danger you cannot take your eyes away from the enemy (tiger). Thus it forces you to focus on things. Hence excess adrenaline production can result in obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors of the kind of "making sure behavior",like making sure the door is closed, making sure that you stay away from germs, washing your hands over and over again, obsession with cleanliness, or symptoms of perfectionism.

OCD can be described as a cluster of symptoms that compels a person to act or think in repetitive ways. The person may be afflicted with compulsive thoughts or possessed with fear of contamination. Others are compelled to make sure that water taps have been properly closed or things are in their correct place.
Being suddenly bombarded with stress hormones - such as cortisol and adrenaline - the mind appears to create images and ideas that fit the strange inner experience of panic and fear. The activation of the Sympathetic Nervous System (SNS) by adrenaline prepares your body for strenuous action in face of danger in the environment. But if the SNS is activated by an internal biological mechanism due to a biological disorder, there is no external enemy or stimulus. So you have to make one up to give you some sort of rational explanation of why you feel the way you do.
OCD is a sub-class of anxiety attacks. Both OCD and anxiety attacks are marked by excess adrenaline production.
This can also be tested with a paper-and-pencil test such as The Nutrition-Behavior Inventory questionnaire
(NBI) or the The Hypo Quizz.
The real question is why is the body overproducing adrenaline and at the wrong time and circumstances?
The answer lies in the function of adrenaline. Adrenaline apart from being a fight/flight hormone is also a hormone that converts sugar stores in the body (glycogen) into glucose. Glucose is the brain's major source of energy. It requires about 70% of glucose to fuel the biochemical machinery of brain cells. Without that energy brain cells will soon die. Thus whenever the brain senses energy starvation it will trigger the release of adrenaline so as to feed the brain again with energy.
The next question is: why is the brain starved of energy with all that sugar being consumed in our society? The reason is that a person may have a physical disorder that prevents the conversion of sugar sources in food (carbohydrates) into biological energy called ATP. That energy is essential in the production of feel good (relaxing) neuro-chemicals, such as serotonin. Without it we will feel anxious, insecure, in danger
and panicky without knowing why.
This is usually the case when a person suffers from Insulin Resistance. Insulin Resistance is usually associated with the development of Diabetes Type II. Most doctors can test this, but they appear to have problems testing for pre-diabetic insulin resistance, because they have not been trained for this. We have a test for hypoglycemia at our web site. The Hypo Quizz.
This condition is called "The Hypoglycemic Syndrome" which is characterized by unstable blood sugar levels, going up and down. Unstable blood sugar levels, due to insulin resistance, cause the body to release stress hormones, such as adrenaline and cortisol. Whenever there is a sudden drop in brain sugar levels, adrenaline kicks in to attempt the redress the imbalance.
We have an explanation how excess adrenaline can cause OCD. The solution is to go on a hypoglycemic diet, which is similar to a diabetic diet. It normalizes blood sugar levels, and stops the brain from producing stress hormones.
According to Dr. Carl Pfieffer, M.D. and research Psychiatrist who reversed mental illness by using nutrition, many vitamins and minerals are involved in glucose metabolism. Namely, Vitamin C, B complex vitamins, calcium, magnesium, zinc. Chromium, manganese, potassium and phosphorous.
Dr Pfieffer, also states that adrenaline and glucocortoid hormones trigger the pancreas to secrete glucagons, which, in turn, promotes the conversion of glycogen to glucose in the liver. The liberated glucose is then released from the liver into the bloodstream and this contributes to hypoglycemia. It can be a vicious circle.
An alkaline diet can help prevent hypoglycemia.
Fish oil can also help OCD.

Books and Workbooks to Help Eliminate OCD

“The OCD Workbook,” is an excellent resource to help those with OCD. It includes self-assessment, intervention strategy, how to help yourself, success stories of others, breaking free, changing your faulty beliefs and more. The book is by Bruce M. Hyman, Ph.D. and Cherry Pedrick, RN

“Brain Lock-Free Yourself from Obsessive-Compulsive Behavior,” by Jeffrey Schwartz, MD.