Are Your Health Problems Candida Connected?

I found this questionnaire on an advertisement but you can pull up different questionnaires on the Internet.

If your answer is "yes" to any question check the box off. When you've completed the questionnaire, add up the points. Your score will help you determine the possibility (or probability) that your health problems are yeast related.
YES Score
1. Have you taken repeated or prolonged courses of antibacterial drugs?
4
2. Have you been bothered by recurrent vaginal, prostate or urinary tract infections?
3
3. Do you feel "sick all over," yet the cause hasn't been found?
2
4. Are you bothered by hormone disturbances, including PMS, menstrual irregularities, sexual dysfunction, sugar craving, low body temperature or fatigue?
2
5. Are you unusually sensitive to tobacco smoke, perfumes, colognes and other chemical odors?
2
6. Are you bothered by memory or concentration problems? Do you sometimes feel "spaced out"?
2
7. Have you taken prolonged courses of prednisone or other steroids; or have you taken "the pill" for more than 3 years?
2
8. Do some foods disagree with you or trigger your symptoms?
1
9. Do you suffer with constipation, diarrhea, bloating or abdominal pain?
1
10. Does your skin itch, tingle or burn; or is it unusually dry; or are you bothered by rashes?
1
Scoring for women: If your score is 9 or more, your health problems are probably yeast-connected. If your score is 12 or more, your health problems are almost certainly yeast-connected.
Scoring for men: If your score is 7 or more, your health problems are probably yeast-connected. If your score is 10 or more, your health problems are almost certainly yeast-connected.

What is Candidia?

Candida albicans is a yeast that resides in the human bowel but can travel to other parts of our body. Under normal conditions, only a small number of Candida live in our intestine. Candidiasis is an overgrowth of Candida albicans. The Candida starts out as simple, relatively harmless single celled yeast. Left unchecked, it can become a problem by developing large colonies and contributing to a wide variety of health problems in both men and women. If this condition is not controlled, the yeast can develop into a more stubborn organism, namely the mycelia hungus form of Candida. This form can contribute to many more serious problems and can be very challenging to overcome. When the Candida problem has advanced to this degree, it is referred to as “systemic Candidiasis.”
Candida is a major player in Chronic Fatigue and Fibromyalgia, and I think if can contribute to Bipolar Disorder.

So You Have Candida. Now What?

Some people take medication for candida, like diflucan. Others take supplements like NatraBio Homeopathic for Candida Yeast. 1-800-243-9245. www.natrobio.com. Dr. Balch suggests taking some of the following: grapefruit seed extract pills, olive leaf, biotin, caprilyic acid, coconut oil, garlic, aloe vera juice, and pau d arco tea. Fish oil also helps. A good natural laxative can be helpful in cleansing the colon which can help get rid of candida.
Millet and quinoa are high in protein and are gluten-free. Avoid dairy, sugars of all kinds (except stevia) and yeasted breads. Are you gluten intolerant?
Do eat lots of green vegetables, cucumbers, tomatoes, lemons, limes and grapefruit and avocadoes. Fish is better than red meat. Check out an alkaline diet which is found in the book, “The pH Miracle.”
Good books:
"The Yeast Connection," by Dr. Crook
"The pH Miracle," by Dr. Robert Young
"From Fatigued to Fantastic, by Dr. Tetlebaum.

Check out candida on the web.