"The smallest feline is a masterpiece."~Leonardo da Vinci

"The Companion", oil on canvas, 24"x 36" came about quite randomly at a recent photoshoot. I knew in my mind what sort of composition I was looking for. I wanted a figure across the foreground of the painting with a good amount of negative space in the background and at the to of the piece. Once again, Aslan, curious about the activity in Laura's apartment, came to investigate. This is the second time that I have painted the two of them together. 

It is always such a pleasure when our cherished pets and companions spend time with us. I adore all animals and have four cats myself. I admire them particularly because they do what they want, not what I want them to.  I think this might be why "dog people" prefer dogs...because dogs DO do what they want them to. I enjoy cats' quiet dignity, their wise expressions, their warmth, their purr and most of all their friendship. Our companion animals love us unconditionally...they love us if we are having a bad day, if we are impatient, if the car won't start, if the paint is peeling, if everything is coming apart. The do not pass judgement (or, if they do, they do it silently) and they accept us just as we are, flaws and all.   

The floor was challenging to paint here, as it usually is. There is quite a reflection on the wood which was tricky to render as there is a lot of blue due to the natural light. There was some artificial light over top of Laura as well. As usual my paintings are not incredibly realistic but when you step back they colours start to intermingle with one another. 

On a side note, this painting as well as "Through The Glass" which I wrote about previously, will be on display at Loch Gallery  in Toronto, Ontario from December 6-January 22, 2009. I will be at the gallery on December 13th from 2-4pm. They are a part of the Best Of The Contemporaries exhibition happening at the gallery. I would love to meet/see you there! 

Also, I will have two new pieces at Loch Gallery in Calgary, Alberta from February 7-28th, 2009. You can find out gallery details by clicking on the gallery link. Thanks for your support if you are able to come out to the exhibition.

Finally, I have new work at Abbozzo Gallery in Oakville, Ontario. The gallery has a terrific exhibition of gallery artists' work currently on display for the holiday season. 

Take care, have a beautiful day and glorify every moment.

"A cat has absolute emotional honesty: human beings, for one reason or another, may hide their feelings, but a cat does not." ~Ernest Hemingway