"The joy of life comes from our encounters with new experiences, and hence there is no greater joy than to have an endlessly changing horizon, for each day to have a new and different sun." ~Christopher McCandless


It is with great pleasure that I am able to announce new information about the forthcoming DVD and book, "Back To The Wild: The Photographs And Writings Of Christopher McCandless". There will be over 300 photographs that Chris took on his odyssey of self-discovery and exploration from 1990-1992.


The official release date for the book and DVD is June 15th, 2011!!


There will be writings from Chris and those who knew and were close to him. All of these materials cohere together to form a portrait of a unique and gifted young man, a man who has touched countless people with his story and life. This book will allow readers to follow in Chris's footsteps as he chronicled his adventures with camera and pen, living life on the cusp of the unknown. You will meet the friends that he met and made, seeing them as he saw them along the open road that he followed so faithfully. 

From the moment I saw Chris's photographs when I visited Walt and Billie in Virginia I was deeply moved...something had to be done with these beautiful images. The world needed to see Chris's vision through is own eyes. I have created and am still working on a body of work surrounding Chris's story and have created paintings based on some of his photographs.

I have an upcoming exhibition of paintings inspired by the life and travels of Christopher McCandless. The exhibition will have its opening reception on June 3rd from 7-10pm. I will also be at the gallery on Saturday, June 4th from 2-4pm for guests who were not able to make the opening reception the night before. I hope to see you there! To see the full selection of available paintings related to Chris's story please visit my website here!

Chris's Pack, Stampede Trail, oil on panel, 24"x36"

An Aesthetic Voyage:
Painting Inspired By The Life And Travels
 Of Christopher McCandless

June 3-18th, 2011

Abbozzo Gallery, Oakville, Ontario, Canada

Opening Reception June 3rd, 7-10pm
June 4th, Artist in attendance from 2-4pm 

If you are interested in any of these paintings you can contact the gallery toll-free at 
1-866-844-4481 or at mail@abbozzogallery.com 

"Diary Of A Supertramp (study)", oil on panel, 8"x10"

"To The Sea", oil on canvas, 24"x36"

"Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth."~Henry David Thoreau

I recently visited Bus 142 on the Stampede Trail where Chris spent his final four months in the summer of 1992. I had last visited this special place 2 years previously. Here are a few photographs that I shot while there. 


Most of the windows are smashed now but efforts have been made to 
place cardboard over them, keeping the elements at bay a bit.



The suitcase left in the bus by Chris's parents is still there, 
along with his bible from when he was a child.



I gathered a small bunch of wildflowers and placed them by
the plaque that Walt and Billie had installed years ago.


           Eventually it was time to leave, but it had been wonderful to return for awhile...

Have a beautiful day and I will post more updates soon!!

Heather