I'm going to try to keep this blog as straightforward and casual as possible...otherwise I will cave under some sort of phantom pressure to say insightful things regarding artwork, movies or whatnot.

Headed to Toronto today to see my friend Shaun's art opening. Met up with other friends and we had a great time attending the opening as all of us are artists with varied opinions. We really enjoyed Shaun's work as usual and convened to discuss what we thought of everything from hyperrealism to abstract art (I don't generally like abstract work). We agreed that a world in which everyone liked the same thing would be very boring indeed. I mentioned that I enjoy it when people don't like my work as well as like it as it provides a nice counterpoint and a different perspective.

I am working on two paintings right now. One is a companion piece to Self-Portrait, Acute which I completed last week. My good friend Anne in BC has already claimed it as hers which is wonderful. I know that she will cherish it. It is a special piece and I am so pleased that it will be in her home.

The second piece is one I have been toiling on for sometime...mostly through procrastination. It is Gayle, Snowshoeing...it is 36"x48". I am pleased with it but it seems as though I've been working on it forever.

I must really get to the Newfoundland paintings that I have promised Emma Butler gallery in St. John's....I want to create three solid works to make a good statement at the gallery. It's like a courtship really...you want to put your best creative foot forward and not make any blunders if possible. You want to make a good impression and hopefully develop a long term relationship out of it all. I have attached the link to Emma Butler Gallery

Today I did a photoshoot with Jade, my friend Chris' wife. She is a beautiful person in all respects and will make an excellent subject. She did a wonderful job at the shoot and it was a pleasure to shoot her. I expect to get two to three paintings from our session today. She is expecting a baby in June so I really wanted to paint a baby bump before the wee one arrives!

I am aiming to surpass my movie watching record of 167 films last year...I am at 51 now...currently watching Iraq In Fragments...

I have finally cracked the spine on Henry David Thoreau's seminal work, Walden. I bought it years ago but am really giving it a bash now.

"“So thoroughly and sincerely are we compelled to live, reverencing our life, and denying the possibility of change. This is the only way, we say; but there are as many ways as there can be drawn radii from one centre. All change is a miracle to contemplate; but it is a miracle which is taking place every instant.”
~Henry David Thoreau, Walden