"Shoal Brook", oil on panel, 8"x10" One of the small paintings I am taking to
Turkey with me for the upcoming art exhibit for International Women's Day


"When it's all over, I want to say: all my life I was a bride married to amazement.
I was the bridegroom, taking the world into my arms." ~Mary Oliver


Again I must apologize for being so neglectful of this blog. Blogs are, like many things, little responsibilities, commitments that we take on and try to nurture and help evolve through whatever we choose to write about, where we travel, whom we meet. I promise to pay more attention to this one in the next few months!

What with the hectic holiday season and some other challenges that have come up, time has slipped away from my regular entries on this blog, which really has become a travel blog, with the odd artistic musing as well. My robust travel schedule begins in earnest next month, with journeys to Arizona, New York City and Ankara, Turkey starting off this exciting year!

The journey to Ankara is particularly interesting because I have been invited by the gracious wife of Canada's Ambassador to Turkey. There is an art exhibit and fundraiser that will be coinciding with International Women's Day in March and I will take a small selection of paintings to have for this exciting event. Proceeds from the show will help women in need in Turkey, which makes the whole adventure even more compelling.

Two other important projects are also happening. One of them I have spoken about already. The pictorial book of photographs that Christopher McCandless took on his two year odyssey from 1990-1992 is coming together! I am working on paintings for this book, paintings based on Christopher's photographs. It is a collaborative effort with Chris's parents and the whole project is very thrilling and one that is especially close to my heart.

Another fledgling artistic endeavor that I have taken on is writing a book based on my travels and subsequent photos and paintings. It will also have a strong, personal component and have my day to day journal included. I shall try my best to steer clear of self-indulgent, navel-gazing writing here yet try not to self-edit too much. The most important thing is that this writing come from the heart, where all true art truly originates.

"Self-Portrait, Renewed", oil on canvas, 14"x11"
Another painting that I shall take to Ankara with me.

My dear friend Wyll is the one who really encouraged me to take on this writing project. I hope that people will find it interesting and want to read it. It is a terrifying yet exhilarating prospect, and on my list of things to do in my lifetime. Why put it off...why not start now? This could apply to anything in our lives...if you have been putting something off, whether talking to someone or making a career change, why put it off? Act today. As Ghandi so wisely said: "be the change you want to see in the world." Thanks Wyll...

Upcoming Events!

I will have a small painting in this year's Burlington Art Centre Art Auction, happening on February 19th, 2010. Here are some details!

"Self-Portrait, Renewal", oil on panel, 8"x10"


"Sasha", oil on canvas, 16"x12"

The cat, what can one say about this glorious creature? With its majestic form, formidable meow, rhythmic purr, and its uncanny ability to hear a can of tuna being opened from three rooms away? One cannot help but fall madly in love with such a glorious creature. Therefore, and quite happily, we as avid cat fanciers have created this homage exhibition consisting of paintings, drawings and transfer art to express our love for the cat. The show was inspired by two cat lover art friends and their cats, Zorica Krasulja and Claudette Losier, who then invited their other cat loving art friends to participate in their show: Heather Horton, Amanda Mckinney, Cathy Peng, James Wylie, Carolyn Endacott, Gisele Grenier, Theresa Dinsmore, and Patricia Robertson.

The Cat's Meow
March 1-31st, 2010
Intolerant Gallery
239 King Street East, Hamilton, Ontario
Opening Reception March 6th at 7pm

Have a beautiful day, wherever you are...

Heather