Occam's razor (sometimes spelled Ockham's razor) is a principle attributed to the 14th-century English logician and Franciscan friar William of Ockham. The principle states that the explanation of any phenomenon should make as few assumptions as possible, eliminating those that make no difference in the observable predictions of the explanatory hypothesis or theory.

I find this theory fascinating and quite logical on many levels. It challenges the notion of assumption, of superfluous presumptions attached to any concept. As human beings I think we might tend to embellish explanations for things, events, moods, behaviors etc, especially if we are feeling sensitive or insecure about said issue. If we pare down our thoughts and distill the most simple reasoning I think it would save a lot of time, grief and energy.

In my artwork I do strive to apply paint simply, loosely without being arbitrary, a mixture of careful and careless perhaps. I am not a blender of paint on canvas by and large. It is conscious. I like to see paint. I like to see brushstrokes and texture inherent in the paint. I think paint wants to be seen and not lost within scraping and scumbling so that it is smooth. However I'm in the minority here as the majority of the classical painters glaze and layer which produce beautiful work...luminous. I just prefer the other road.

Finished another small piece today...onto the snowshoeing painting that seemingly is taking forever. If I don't finish it this week I'll be really ticked off with myself.

Tomorrow off to David and Anita Blackwood's studio in Port Hope. Can't wait! This man is an inspiration and faithful patron of my work. Thanks to him there's a cute little red cottage waiting for me in Newfoundland. Sadly, David informs me that I'll have a tough time finding vegan food on The Rock. I'll live on oatmeal and dry cereal but I'll be so happy that it won't matter! I have to start thinking about my method and approach to the trip and how I will accomplish my goal of painting the people who live there while summoning courage to ask if they would sit for me briefly while I take their picture. I have attached David's link here.

An eventful couple of days around here. Went to my friend Zorica's art opening with the Women's Art Association in Hamilton where she snagged Best In Show for her painting. Fantastic. Had a great vegan feast at Conrad's house filled with a diverse group of people. Lots of laughter, stimulating discussions ranging from the glory of avocados to cholesterol to soccer.

Two pet peeves: 1- people who smirk while listening to their ipods at the gym.
2- chronic lateness.

Two things I am grateful for today: 1-my friend Anne in BC. She bought a painting from me and that means so much to me. She is one of a kind.
2-no surprise here....chocolate.

Song that I cannot get out of my head today: All These Things That I Have Done by The Killers.

"If, then, we would indeed restore mankind by true...botanic, magnetic, or natural means, let us first be as simple and well as Nature ourselves, dispel the clouds which hang over our own brows, and take up a little life into our pores". ~Thoreau, Walden