Favorite picture of the month
my brand new niece Leilani

This has been an incredibly busy month for me. I started my second class of the semester (now I'm taking Abnormal Psychology and an EMT certification class). These, together with my full time job in a nursing home and my volunteer work at a crisis hotline, keep me feeling pretty darned overwhelmed. 

My EMT class is a lot of information. As of yet, I'm not keeping up  with the reading in the 2000 page text at all, but I'm bumbling along in the class regardless. I am now CPR/AED certified for infants/children/adults. That's a nice feeling. I think everyone should know how to save a life in this way. 

In Abnormal Psychology I have taken my first test and got a fantastic score. I give my blogging complete credit for that score. Writing blog posts about my psychology class is the best studying I've ever done in my life. If only I could do the same thing with my EMT text without boring you all silly. This month's Abnormal Psychology posts are:

The Definition of Abnormal
A History of Abnormal Psychology
Abnormal Psychology in Contemporary Society
Contemporary Viewpoints on Treating Mental Illness - Biology
Contemporary Viewpoints on Treating Mental Illness - Psychology
Frontline: New Asylums
Brave New Films: This is Crazy

My book reviews are:

The Blank Slate, by Stephen Pinker
The Epic of Gilgamesh - Historical Background
Game of Thrones, by George R. R. Martin


My most popular blog post this month was: The Definition of Abnormal

I am currently reading or listening to:

I'm hoping to finish this one in time for Aarti's A More Diverse Universe
Thought this spooky book would be a good one for October


This month I finished reading or listening to: 

This was my RL book club's choice for September

I read this with Doing Dewey's nonfiction book club
Read this to supplement my posts about warehousing the mentally ill in prisons

I think I'm going to a conference on addiction in a couple weeks. Thought this would be a nice supplement.




Next month's blogging activities include:

Aarti's A More Diverse Universe at BookLust

The Halloween Reading Challenge at Reading Every Season
R.I.P. X hosted this year by The Estella Society
Picture used by permission by creator Abigail Larson



This post is linked up to the Facebook Group The Sunday Salon. "The Salon is open to anyone who'd like to discuss books of a Sunday (or, frankly, any other day of the week). ... Discuss what you're reading here, or link to relevant blog posts, or comment on one anothers posts. Enjoy."

This post is also linked up to the Sunday Post at Caffeinated Book Reviewer. "The Sunday Post is a weekly meme hosted here @ Caffeinated Book Reviewer. It’s a chance to share news~ A post to recap the past week on your blog, showcase books and things we have received. Share news about what is coming up on our blog for the week ahead."