This week was pretty uneventful. The Super Bowl party was fun, but of course the Panthers lost. My nephew, who picked the Broncos because they were ahead when we got to the party, had a fun time ribbing me throughout the game. Monday I had insurance problems - they wouldn't fill my prescription because the dose was too high, but I need that dose to keep stable. I hate insurance. Tuesday I bought some new running shoes - I've decided to start exercising since I'm unemployed now and won't get the exercise I've been getting at work. Wow am I out of shape. I intended to bike for an hour and then run for an hour. I ended up biking for half an hour and then heading home. But at least I wasn't in physical pain the next day. Thursday I had tax problems - apparently someone messed up my W-4, I'm guessing my company since I didn't change it from last year, so I owe $700. Perfect. I just quit my job, too. I'm hoping I messed up when filling out the form. Might cough up the money to get them professionally done. I only got ONE book read! How is that even possible? This coming week I'm looking forward to an EMT ridealong with a local fire department, I'll let you know how that goes. 

Reluctant Romantic Challenge

I'm going to throw in my Reluctant Romantic post into my update post since my answer is so short. This week's Reluctant Romantic question is: why have you not read very much of this genre in the past? As you may or may not know, I'm reading modernist books this month for the Reluctant Romantic challenge over at Doing Dewey. So far I've finished Mrs. Dalloway, by Virginia Woolf; and Passage to India, by E. M. Forster. I've enjoyed both books. 

The reason I haven't read very much in the past is not because I have any negative perceptions of the genre or that I've had a bad experience reading it, but only because I've expected it to be heavy reading (which it is) and I just haven't gotten around to it. I'm glad I had this opportunity to challenge myself.


Lectures: 

The Will to Power Lecture 2

Literary Modernism Lecture 2

Posts: 

Reluctant Romantic Check-In: Genre Speed Dating

Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World, by Jack Weatherford

Among Murderers, by Sabine Heinlein

You Were Here, by Cori McCarthy

Currently Reading: 


Completed: 


Watched: 


Acquired: 


One Line A Day is a 5-year one-line daily journal given to me by a friend. The Game of Life will be given to my nephew for his birthday. Passage to India will be my next audiobook. Shadow Magic is actually a granted wish from NetGalley (yea!). Incarceration Nations was an impulse purchase that I'll hopefully read next month - I'm interested in prison right now because of my new volunteer experience with the recently paroled convicts. And I figured I needed a couple of practice tests for studying for the NREMT (the national certification exam for becoming an EMT).






This update is posted to Stacking the Shelves @Tynga'sReviews, Sunday Salon, Sunday Post @CaffeinatedBookReviewer,   and It's Monday What are You Reading @BookDate