Merry Christmas to all of my readers! (Disclaimer: Happy Holidays too!)


This week has been a good one. It's been really nice being on break - and I got so much stuff done I can't believe it. For one thing, I supposedly fixed my financial aid problem. I was told when I filed my FAFSA that I couldn't get financial aid until I declared a major. But I didn't want to declare a major. My major is "getting myself into PA program." So this week, I declared a major. I am now pursuing an AA with emphasis in Biology. HA! That's a step down from my PhD. Anyway, I'm hoping that if I get proper funding, I can move down to a part-time job (hopefully as an EMT) and take more classes each semester. That'll speed up my process quite a bit.

If you remember from my last update, I was entering into a #nocaffeine challenge. The first week is complete, and I never even suffered from a headache! I did suffer from mildly crippling exhaustion, though. That may have been exacerbated by giving platelets on Monday. In fact, sometimes I wonder if giving platelets is just really bad for me. It seems like every time I give platelets, I get exhausted. But there are always extenuating circumstances. Like last time - I worked till 1 am and then was in to work at 6 am the next day. Isn't that reason enough to be exhausted? So for right now, I'm going to continue my donations. :)  

Next week I'm going to start reading chapters in my EMT textbook - getting ahead for the semester. My reason is that 1) I know how much reading there is because I tried taking the class last semester and 2) My first month of the class will be difficult since I will be busy two evenings per week training for the COLUMNS program (you know, the one where I work with a life-term parolee recently released from prison). I plan on keeping bullet points of things I've learned from the chapters and from class so because I think it's sort of fun. You are welcome to peruse, skim, or skip. 

Feature and Follow Question: What was the best Christmas (or other holiday) gift I ever received?

Well, my dad usually gets me a $100 gift card for Barnes and Noble. This year he got me a $150 gift card. Totally the best. 

Posts: 

Missing Person, by Patrick Modiano

A Klingon Christmas Carol, at the Historic Mounds Theatre

The Sixth Extinction, by Elizabeth Kolbert

How to Train Your Dragon, by Cressida Cowell

Lord of the Rings - A short comment on allegory

The First Christmas, by Marcus J. Borg and John Dominic Crossan

Books Completed:




Books Acquired:


Film and Theater:


Bookish presents (to others): 


These were given to one of the residents at the nursing home I work at. She said she liked history. I thought it was a good selection. 
Gave these books to my boyfriend's nephew. He's too young for them, but I figure his parents can read them to him. They're on the Harry Potter books now. 
These went to my mom
To my friend Liz (who is hopefully not reading this.
If you are, I also got you chocolates). 
These go to my aunt









This update is posted to Feature and Follow Friday @Parajunkee and @Alison Can Read, Stacking the Shelves @Tynga'sReviews, Sunday Salon, Sunday Post @CaffeinatedBookReviewer,   @MailboxMonday, It's Monday What are You Reading @BookDate