Well, this was a busy week for me. It started out on Sunday with a pumpkin carving party with my friend and my 12-yo nephew. My nephew's pumpkin is on the left and mine is on the right. My pumpkin has already been devoured by squirrels on my front porch. 


The work-week was good. I'm settling in to my new job well and am feeling more confident in the patient care aspect of it. 

I tried out the Serial Reader app because I saw so many people on Litsy using it. It gives you a short (maybe 10 page) "issue" of a classic novel of your choice to read each day. Figured it would be a great way to bully through some of the longer books that I look at wistfully and never pick up. So far, it's been fun but a little difficult to stop reading at the end of the issue.

As many of you know, Saturday was Dewey's 24-hour readathon, where people all around the world join in to read as much as they can in 24 hours. I was hoping to read for the full 24 hours (with some breaks), but I got tired and fell asleep after 16. It's probably for the best. People with bipolar disorder, like myself, should be getting their full allotment of sleep lest they tip their mental health scale accidentally. So I'm happy today with the amount that I read - which was about twice as much as I would usually read on a lazy Saturday. I read: 

2 Serial Reader Issues of North and South, by Elizabeth Gaskell
2 hours of Stiletto, by Daniel O'Malley
3 hours of Men We Reaped, by Jesmyn Ward
Volume 10 of Death Note, by Tsugumi Ohba
100 pages of Into the Woods, by Tana French
50 pages of How to Read the Bible, by James Kugel


This week I watched The Addams Family and Home, both during the pumpkin carving party: 



I finished listening to Stiletto, by Daniel O'Malley and Volume 10 of Death Note, by Tsugumi Ohba


I'm currently reading Men We Reaped, by Jesmyn Ward with the Social Justice Book Club; Death Note, by Tsugumi Ohba; In the Woods, by Tana French; How to Read the Bible, by James Kugel; and North and South, by Elizabeth Gaskell as my serial read. 