Good news! Hibernator's Library will be featured in this week's Feature and Follow Friday, hosted by Allison Can Read, and Parajunkee. This meme asks a weekly question and provides a linky for the answers. Then we blog hop and find new blogs to follow (and new friends). 

This week's question is:

If you could write a book, what would it be about?


I've always wanted to write a book, and I've had so many ideas over the years. I like the idea of my first novel being young adult - because I want tomorrow's adults to have inquiring minds. But I struggle with meaning. Everything has to have meaning to me. Most recently, I've been thinking of a retelling of an important epic like Gilgamesh Epic or Milton's Paradise Lost. I want the story to make some of the major defining philosophical and moral themes of the epic accessible to youth. Problem is, they're both about anti-heroes, which is hard to write. Let alone the questions: Do I understand the ultimate meanings of these epics enough to interpret and adapt into a format that a teenager would enjoy reading? And who would publish it? This is when I have to decide to write a book just for my own gratification. :)

When did you start blogging?

I first started blogging regularly back in 2011, but sometime last year I was sick and stopped blogging. When I felt inspired again this August, I decided to start fresh - get a new atmosphere, a new content, and (mostly) new followers. That's when Hibernator's Library was born. 

What is your favorite part of book blogging?

Writing posts helps me to better understand the books I'm reading. I also meet lots of wonderful bloggers who encourage me to read outside my normal hover-zone. Book bloggers are some of the most supportive people I've met. 

What type of books do you mainly blog about?

I read a large mixture of books. I read a lot of nonfiction of varying topics, classics, science fiction / fantasy, young adult, and every once in a while modern "literary fiction." 

What are your favorite books?

I've always had trouble with this question. I'd have to pick an Austen novel - probably Sense and Sensibility. Of course I love, love, love Harry Potter. Lord of the Rings was also quite wonderful. Believe it or not, those are the only books I remember ever re-reading in my life. 

What has been the best thing that has happened to you because of book blogging?

Meeting all of you wonderful book bloggers has been wonderful. I'm very big on reducing stigma of mental illness, and I find that there are many of you out there who are supportive and understanding when I talk about my own mental illness.





Linky Tools subscription expired. List not available.