Katie at Doing Dewey is hosting the Reluctant Romantic Challenge in February. 

Is there a genre you’d like to read more of in 2016? Or a genre that you’ve never given a chance? The Reluctant Romantic event this February is the time to do something about it! Lasting all of February,  there will be optional discussion topics and check-ins every Saturday and a twitter chat at the end of the month. To join in, just post a sign-up wherever your online home is and share what genre you’ll be getting to know this month.

Schedule and Discussion Topics
Feb 6 – Genre Speed Dating – What genre are you getting to know this month? Why do you want to give it a chance?

Feb 13 – It’s Complicated – Is there anything that keeps you from reading this genre more?

Feb 20 – Young Love – Have you read the genre you’re trying before? How was your first experience with that genre this month?

Feb 27 – Relationship Status – Where is your relationship with the genre you tried? Will you read more of this genre in the future?

For this challenge, I will be reading modernist literature, since I've looked at that tag on LibraryThing and discovered I have read none of the books listed. Besides, it fits in with my commitment to read a couple of Virginia Woolf books for the #woolfalong. Here are some potential books that I'm going to read. 

Mrs. Dalloway, by Virginia Woolf
To the Lighthouse, by Virginia Woolf
Swann's Way, by Marcel Proust
Beyond Good and Evil, by Friedrich Nietzsche
The Birth of Tragedy Out of the Spirit of Music, Friedrich Nietzsche
On the Genealogy of Morals, Friedrich Nietzsche
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, by James Joyce

Since I always try to alternate fiction with non-fiction, I've added in some of Nietzsche's works. His philosophy influenced modernism quite a bit. In addition, I got some lectures about Nietzsche and modernism that I will hopefully have time to skim - just so I know what I'm reading. This will be a hard challenge for me, but that's the point of this challenge. 