Hero with Chi Three


This week was a lot of fun. I had three days off in the middle of the week, and got lots of reading done. I'm also stockpiling my TBR of graphic novels for Dewey's readathon (coming up on the 22nd). No, I don't plan on only reading graphic novels, but I know that if I sit reading for 24 hours straight my eyes are going to be blurring over at the end. Thus, easy reading choices.  

Selfie with supermoon
On Saturday I went to The Trail of Terror with my best friend and my boyfriend. We got to enjoy the supermoon. The supermoon is supposed to be at its best at moon-rise this (Sunday) evening, so check it out! The Trail of Terror was fun - it was a set of maybe five little fun/spook houses, a wooded walk (shortened because of flooding), and a heated "maze" all surrounding a karaoke bar. There were also spooktacular rides, games, food booths, and three bars. 

I didn't really find anything scary, but there were a couple of times I felt thoroughly lost in the spook houses and maze when there were too many strobe lights or too little light. I have this weird thing where my vision starts flashing whenever there's not enough light, making it even harder for me to find my way in darkness. (Apparently I have an inner strobe light?) I had to just hang on to my boyfriend to guide me through those parts because they were very disorienting. But I guess that's the point. 

Today I plan on carving pumpkins with my nephew and my best friend. I'm sure I'll have some pictures to share in my next update. 

This week on my blog I wrote one book review: The Fifth Child. It's a spoiler review, so watch out. That was my one Halloween book for the season, unless In the Woods counts (it's a mystery). 

Books Completed

I finally finished Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, which I hadn't been making very quick progress on despite loving it (again). I then sprinted through The Fifth Child, by Doris Lessing - I didn't expect that to be such quick reading. And because my eyes were getting blurry from all that reading, I settled down to read one of my graphic novel stack: Chi's Sweet Home Volume 3. Adorable!



Watched

I watched the first two Terminator movies with my boyfriend.



Currently Reading: 