Well, the day of Dewey's 24 hour readathon has finally come, and I'm really looking forward to it. I've never participated for the full 24 hours before, and am eager to see how I hold up (especially since I had a long day at work yesterday). My strategy is simple: read until I need a break, then read again. I have a mixture of fiction, nonfiction, graphic novels, and audiobooks to get through. I don't know if I'll participate in the challenges or not, but this will be my base post which I'll update throughout the next 24 hours. 


1) What fine part of the world are you reading from today?

I'm reading from Minneapolis, MN. It's a beautiful fall day here...a little too cold for me to go outside and read, but nice weather to sit by a window.

2) Which book in your stack are you most looking forward to?

I'm hoping to get a huge chunk out of In the Woods, by Tana French. 

3) Which snack are you most looking forward to?

I didn't have time to prepare snacks because I was called in to work unexpectedly on Thursday and worked a 16 hour day on Friday. So I might have to go snack shopping during a break. I'll probably settle for chips and salsa. 

4) Tell us a little something about yourself!

Well, what do you want to know? I work in healthcare and I read a lot. 

5) If you participated in the last read-a-thon, what’s one thing you’ll do different today? If this is your first read-a-thon, what are you most looking forward to?

This is my first readathon where I'm really participating rather than participating in spirit. I'm curious to see how long I will last. And I'm hoping to get lots and lots read. 


Updates


Hour 0: Got out of bed at 6 for a 7am start.  



Hour 1: I started with today's Serial Reader issue of North and South (is anyone else using this app?), and have now moved on to How to Read the Bible, by James Kugel.

Hour 2: Continued to read How to Read the Bible. 




Hours 3-6: Finished the audiobook Stiletto, by Daniel O'Malley, and delved into In the Woods, by Tana French.

Hour 7: Listened to Men We Reaped, by Jesmyn Ward as an eye-ball break.  