Welcome to the second week of Nonfiction November! This week's topic is:

What are you looking for when you pick up a nonfiction book? Do you have a particular topic you’re attracted to? Do you have a particular writing style that works best? When you look at a nonfiction book, does the title or cover influence you? If so, share a title or cover which you find striking.

I try very hard to get a variety of non-fiction in my reading. Some years I succeed and some years I don't. Last year I think I did a pretty good job. Until last week, I thought the topics that interested me the most are science and medicine - with an emphasis on empirical rather than personal. However, while I was answering last week's question I realized something - those preferences have changed. Two of my top three favorite books are memoirs! And all three of them were about social awareness.Of course I already knew that social awareness was an important topic to me, but I hadn't realized how much it had affected my reading choices. 

In the past, I have preferred books that are researched so well they almost read like a textbook. And I still have a leaning towards the empirical rather than the personal, though memoirs on certain subjects (mental illness, for instance) are more and more appealing to me. I read so many empirical books about mental illness that I'm afraid I'm losing the people that are affected by the illnesses. Same for social justice issues. I can read textbook information all I want, but if I don't read memoirs, then I'll never know how people feel about these things - only what they think about them. 

And YES, the cover and title are a huge influence over me. Ever hear the phrase "don't judge a book by it's cover?" Of course you have. And I do. I think the cover and title should be chosen carefully to indicate what sort of book is inside. It is the publisher's first line of attack in getting someone to pick up the book and read the blurb in the first place. One book that I picked up mainly because of the cover and title was Severed, by Frances Larson: 



What about you? What are you looking for in your nonfiction? Comment below or include a link to your post in the linky:



1. Lory @ Emerald City Book Review 9. Katherine@ Writerly Reader 17. Sharlene @ Real Life Reading
2. Heather @ Based on a True Story 10. Ellie @ Curiosity Killed the Bookworm 18. Kailana (The Written World)
3. Julie @Julz Reads 11. Debbie Rodgers @Exurbanis 19. Amanda @ Gun in Act One
4. Amanda @ A Bookshelf Monstrosity 12. Katie @ Doing Dewey 20. raidergirl3@ an adventure in reading
5. Steph @ B.B. Toady 13. Eva @ The Paperback Princess 21. Louise @ Lone Star on a Lark
6. Nick @ One Catholic Life 14. Jo Ann @ Lakeside Musing 22. Jenny @ Reading the End
7. Stacey @ Unruly Reader 15. Sarah's Book Shelves 23. Deb Nance at Readerbuzz
8. Risa@ The Next Chapter 16. Juliana @ablankgarden (Aphra Behn, by Vita Sackville- West) 24. You're next!
Mister Linky's Magical Widgets
If you are participating in Nonfiction November, fill in the form below and press Enter.
Your name: 
Your URL: 
  Please leave a comment after linking... Thank you!
Click here for Mister Linky's name/URL cookie removal tool.