I've read the Bible from cover to cover only once in my life, and I'd like the opportunity to do it again more meticulously - this time interpreting from a literary perspective. I'm going to dedicate 2017 to reading the Bible and related nonfiction. I will read and post throughout the year regardless of whether anyone joins me, but I'd love it if I had company. If you'd like to join, please sign up below. Or, if you don't have a URL, you can leave a comment, email me at hibernators.library at gmail.com or tweet me @hibernatorslibr.


Here's the idea: I will read the Bible following a schedule as shown: 



Whenever I finish a Biblical book, I will publish one or more commentary blog posts on it. I will also have a sign-up for anyone else's input if they have posts of their own that they wish to share with the group. 

I'm using two resources as outlines for my studies: 


MIT Open Courseware has an outline for a Bible course available here. The nice thing about this course is that it provides some interesting discussion questions. It is available for free to anyone who wants to look at it. 
Great Courses has a lecture series called Reading Biblical Literature: Genesis to Revelation. I bought it from Audible and am loving what I've seen of it. I will listen to it, peruse some of the supplementary readings (as many as I can - they look well-chosen), and tell you what I've learned.
If you want to join the group read, you can simply read along with me or you can go all-out and delve into one of the courses. Also, you can read some sections of the Bible and not others, or you can read at a different pace. All that is cool! What is not cool is being rude or confrontational - this is meant to be a literary reading of the Bible for people of all beliefs. I reserve the right to delete rude or confrontational posts from my blog, though I'm hoping I won't see anything of the sort. 


In preparation I purchased a few different translations of the Bible:



For this project, I will focus mainly on the Literary Study Bible, but I'm hoping to have time to compare to the other translations and let you all know which translations are the most moving to me. 
This site is using Mister Linky's Magical Widgets. Click here to display the links for this post.
Blog Owner: You may upgrade to display more than one Linky at a time.