This was a good month. I had three Thanksgiving celebrations: one with my cousins in Iowa, one with my boyfriend's family, and one with my own family & boyfriend. They were all a wonderful time. I'm pleased with my progress in my Abnormal Psychology class, work is going uneventfully, and I was very active on my blog. I tried to alternate between "lecture" posts and book review posts this month.


I participated in Nonfiction November with the ladies at  Doing Dewey, Sophisticated Dorkiness, I'm Lost in Books, and Regular Rumination. During the month, I read 6 nonfiction books (Evil Hours, I am Malala, The Epic of Gilgamesh and Old Testament Parallels, Quiet, and The Archetypal Significance of Gilgamesh) and reviewed 7. I also enjoyed reading science fiction along with Rinn Reads. I was only able to read 2 science fiction books (The Martian and Shada), and review 3. 

Next month I'll be joining the Christmas Spirit Reading Challenge hosted by The Christmas Spirit. So far, my plans are Little Women, by Louisa May Alcott; The Three Sisters, by Sonia Halbach; and The First Christmas, by Marcus Borg. Hopefully I'll be able to squeeze in some more. You can see other upcoming challenges in my Challenges Tab.

I've been having trouble with formatting this month. If I add a link or italicize after-the-fact, it sometimes turns out really big. In past months, I could resize it, but now it won't let me do that. It's irritating. Any advice? 

Abnormal Psychology Posts:

Depression - an Overview
Personality Disorders - Clusters and Dimensions
Personality Disorders - Cluster A
Personality Disorders - Cluster B
Personality Disorders - Cluster C
The Biological Effects of Anxiety on the Body
Stress and Your Body - An Introduction
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Dissociative Disorders
Borderline Personality Disorder
Dialectical Behavioral Therapy

Book & Movie Reviews:

The Noonday Demon, by Andrew Solomon
Dark Eden, by Chris Beckett
Gilgamesh Translations
The Biology of Desire
The Martian, by Andy Weir
The Gilgamesh Epic and Old Testament Parallels, by Alexander Heidel
Black Five, by J. Lynn Bailey 
Crazy: A Father's Search Through America's Mental Health Madness, by Pete Earley
Quiet, by Susan Cain
Evil Hours, by David J. Morris
I am Malala, by Malala Yousafzai and Christina Lamb
Shada, by Douglas Adams and Gareth Roberts

Book Completed: 




Acquired:






Movies/Shows Watched: 




This update is posted to Sunday Salon, Sunday Post @CaffeinatedBookReviewer, Stacking the Shelves @Tynga'sReviews,  @MailboxMonday, It's Monday What are You Reading @BookDate