When to Seek Help for Dealing with Depression?

This is a question that many people struggle to answer as there is no right or wrong answer and it is different for all of us.  Below are some indicators you might be on the path to depression or already depressed.  The criteria below were taken from a group of respondents participating in a study to learn how to deal with their depression.  Use the list to begin to help you learn your warning signs of depression, combat your depression before it becomes all-consuming and most importantly to get the help you need in dealing with your depression.  If you need to seek the help of a professional, please do so immediately. 


Many people deal with their depression on their own successfully.  This website provides many wonderful tools to help you learn how to deal with your depression.  The sooner you recognize your depressed or entering a depressed state, the easier it will be for you to combat your depression.    If you feel your own attempts to cope with your depression are failing, please contact a trained counselor or psychologists.  Many people respond to; “they know they are depressed”, when their own efforts to overcome their depression do not work.    You can access our trained counselor for free at any time by going to the free help tab above.  But we urge you to seek out face to face counseling if you deem it necessary.  

I know I'm depressed or on my way to depression when:
when I loose interest in things I love or do daily
when my thinking becomes irrational
when feelings of sadness overwhelms me
when feelings of sadness or negative thoughts lasts for a week
when my sleeping patterns change; I sleep too much or not at all
when I don't eat; I have no appetite
when I eat too much to make my depressed feeling go away
when my desire to have sex goes away
when I stop going out with my friends
when I isolate myself from my family
when I can't focus on what matters
when I can't work
when I cant motivate myself
when the depression overwhelms me
when I'm paralyzed by my thoughts
when I can't move
when I'm negative about most everything
when I don't laugh or smile anymore
when I see only black and white
when I feel depressed for too long
when I feel emotionally fragile
when I get mad all the time
when I can't stand the negative emotions anymore
when my emotions hurt me physically
when I start to think about suicide
when I don't care what I look like
when I stop taking care of myself
when I start thinking about divorce or separation
when I notice I spend too much time on the couch watching TV
when I feel hopeless and helpless
when I cry all the time
when I finally cry
when I stay in bed all the time
when I feel emotionally overwhelmed and out of control
when it lasts for more than a week
when my depression is out of proportion to my circumstances
when my thoughts do not make sense
when others tell me I'm not myself
when it lasts more than two days