Counseling, meditation, yoga and positive visualizations have all received attention as therapies for depression that can nurture, calm and bring a different outlook. Less publicized but just as effective is the Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT). EFT combines positive affirmations with the ancient art of acupuncture to bring about a whole body and mind healing.

What is the Emotional Freedom Technique?

EFT is a type of energy therapy that uses psychology with acupressure, a less invasive needle free form of acupuncture. Instead of needles, which may put some people off the therapy, EFT utilizes simple tapping at chakra energy points to shift energy and move it in a more positive direction. It has a distinct advantage over traditional acupuncture because people wishing to try the technique can do so without going to a practitioner with little to no training and they can perform EFT as many times as they would like, for no cost. As it can be self administered, it is a useful way of dealing with phobias or panic attacks.

How to Do EFT

Identify the Problem

You should start by identifying the problems that are contributing to you feeling depressed, whether it's money worries, pressures at work, arguments with family or marital problems. Be honest with yourself because if you don't confront these issues openly it will be harder to let go of them and the therapy may not be as effective for you.  Be direct and if the problem is with people, don't be afraid to mention their names. If you have physical symptoms of depression such as tension headaches, palpitations or stomach pain you can name those and where you experience the pain in your body. This is because EFT can be used to help heal physical effects too.  Once you have identified the nature of your problems you should think up a short phrase that encompasses that and repeat it a few times to acknowledge and release it.

Rate Your Problem

You should then rate your problem on a scale of 0-10, just like a pain scale. After you have completed the session you can then re-score and see if your numbers have dropped. This will give you an indication of how effective each session has been.

Tap For Freedom

There are several energy points on your face, chest area, under the arms and on the hands.  These are the eye brow, the side of the eye, under the eye, under the nose, the chin, the collar bone and under the arm. The points on your hand are the thumb, index finger, middle finger, little finger and the side of your hand - called the 'karate chop' point.  You should tap on this point while acknowledging your problems. Then work through all the energy points in sequence by tapping them all.  

Say a Positive Affirmation

The next step is to be compassionate towards yourself and say a positive affirmation, for instance, "I let my tension headache and depression go and I love and accept myself unconditionally."
The process is designed to be repeated as many times as needed. You may feel uplifted at the first try but if you don't, you can keep doing it until you start to feel better.

Does EFT Really Work?

Everything is composed of energy, including your body. Both physical illness and emotional illness can cause disruptions and blockages in the flow of this energy. By tapping on specific points and simultaneously replacing negative thought with positive ones, you can redirect the energy and help it to flow freely. This can alter your perspective and improve your health.

Is there any scientific evidence for this? Yes! There have been more than 60 research studies in peer reviewed medical journals that show a huge 98% success rate from EFT in treating psychological disorders like depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress syndrome. The same outstanding figure was found in these multiple studies for pain conditions, auto-immune disease, seizures and other problems. EFT reduces cortisol, a stress hormone, in patients. This has led some researchers to suggest that nurses use it in their everyday practice when dealing with patients with depression or chronic ill health. The NHS in the UK has already started to offer EFT to patients in some areas of the country and some isolated medical units are using it within the USA.

It has no harmful side-effects, unlike anti-depressant tablets, so even if you find it isn't for you, it's certainly worth a try.

Post Written by Anne Farns 