How to deal with depression is something millions of people contend with on a daily basis.  It is estimated that 19 million Americans are diagnosed with a Major Depressive Disorder every year, about two times as many people have undiagnosed Major Depressive Disorder and most of us deal with some form of depression every year that stem from the winter blues, life event(s), relationships, work and just the overall daily struggles of being a human.  How to deal with depression is something that tens of millions of people struggle with every year.

Most of us have to learn to cope with depression so that we can live the quality of life we want and deserve.  The good news is that depression is treatable and manageable and all of us can defeat depression.  There are countless strategies we can implement in our lives to effectively deal with major and minor depression.

This blog is dedicated to outlining these strategies and helping you the best we can deal with depression.  You are not alone on this journey as the statistics clearly show us.  They also show us that by implementing the strategies we outline in this blog you can learn how to manage and overcome depression and change your life. 


In this blog you will learn how to deal with depression through:
Proven cognitive-behavioral techniques
Subconscious and conscious thought patterns
Exercise; not just any exercise
Diet
Daily motivating tasks
Naturally increasing particular hormones and chemicals in our bodies
Play
Writing
Helping others
Developing life-long goals
And much, much more

Watch the YouTube video below of an Olympic athlete who spent his entire life fighting to be the best so he could win a medal in the Olympics and ultimately finish what he started.  It does not turn out the way he intended.  But he kept fighting until the end.  You too can reach your goal of learning to deal with depression, but you have to keep fighting. 


Dealing with depression is a fight, a struggle.  A fight we can win if we learn how to deal with depression by implementing the strategies outlined in this blog and never, ever giving up.  We are here for you.  Enjoy the video.