It can be a very difficult task getting motivated to move when you are depressed.  In order to effectively manage and deal with your depression; you must be able to move and act in order to change your thoughts and thus your feelings of depression.   The tips and resources below will help drive the necessary chemicals to your brain to become motivated, more active and less depressed. Start off every day doing one or all of the following:

Listen to the motivating songs and speeches below.  If after listening, you would like an mp3 copy, just fill out the form and I will send you a copy. 


Read motivating and inspirational books, articles or quotes every morning to release the chemicals necessary to motivate you, push you to move and thus help you overcome your depression.    

Motivating speeches:

Speech by Eric Thomas. He is is a motivational speaker, author, activist, and a minister. Here is an awesome speech he gave to a group of students on the secrets to success. You can listen to this every morning, apply his concepts to your battle with depression and you are sure to learn how to deal with your depression.  


                                                                                   


DREAM Motivational speech.  This is compilation of motivational speeches that will have you ready to change your life and be happy.  Listen to this daily as you learn to develop the motivation to act differently daily thus creating the thoughts necessary to overcome your depression.  

                                         





Great Motivational Speech For Success, I Can Do It, It's Possible: Fill your mind with "It's Possible!!" and you will learn to develop the thought and behavioral patterns necessary to beat depression.  Do not let any one tell you that you can not overcome depression!  You Can!!

                    







Speech by Jim Rohn. Jim Rohn was a pretty incredible guy. He was an entrepreneur, author and motivational speaker. His rags to riches story, played a large part in his work, which influenced others in the personal development industry. Although he had done a lot in both life and business, he was known primarily for inspiring self development. Listen to this daily as you learn to develop the motivation to act differently daily thus creating the thoughts necessary to overcome your depression.    
 

                     


 Steve Jobs' 2005 Stanford Commencement Address:
                          How can you apply this to help you deal with depression?  You can. Just focus on his three main points as it relates to your life and your battle with depression.  1. Life will hit you hard but you must stay focused, get up and fight. 2. Connect the dots of your life; you're depressed for a good. meaningful reason. 3. Motivation: If today were your last day, would you want to feel this way...




Best motivational speeches from famous people Stallone Schwarzenegger Mohammed Ali Steve Jobs.
It's not over.  It's never over until you conquer your depression and live your dreams.  Listen to this every day and begin to realize you have the power to overcome your depression and continue to live your dreams.  

                               



Powered byEMF Contact Form

Everything Happens for a Reason __ Just a simple inspirational video that you can watch at your leisure to unleash your positive energy/thoughts and begin to learn how to deal with depression.

                    


Motivating Songs  (Utilize Chrome or Explorer)

 One Republic - I Lived


3 Great Motivational Songs: X Ray Dog - Final Hour,300 Violin Orchesta - Jose Quintero, and Aqua Vitae



Bruce Springsteen - My City of Ruins





The Script featuring Will I Am - Hall of Fame

"Yeah, You could be the greatest
You can be the best
You can be the king kong banging on your chest..."

You can learn to deal with and overcome depression!!






  One Republic - Feel Again




Motivational Reading


     
                                                                           As A Man Thinketh by James Allen 
A wonderful, timeless book about the power
of thoughts.  Our thoughts control our destiny
and our depression.  Once you learn to take
over your thoughts, you will learn to deal with

and overcome your depression.


James Allen wrote:

"Mind is the Master power that molds and makes, And Man is Mind, and evermore he takes the tool of thought, and, shaping that he wills, Brings forth a Thousand Joys, a Thousand Ills: He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass: Environment is but his looking glass."

CLICK HERE to read the entire book!  Enjoy!






   50 Inspirational Quotes to Help You Learn How to Deal With Your Depression.
“Life has many ways of testing a person’s will, either by having nothing happen at all or by having everything happen all at once.” – Paulo Coelho
“There are two ways of spreading light: to be the candle, or the mirror that reflects it.”  - Edith Wharton
“With everything that has happened to you, you can either feel sorry for yourself or treat what has happened as a gift. Everything is either an opportunity to grow or an obstacle to keep you from growing. You get to choose.” – Dr. Wayne W Dyer
“Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or happy.” - Norman Vincent Peale
“Hate. It has caused a lot of problems in this world but has not solved one yet.” – Maya Angelou
“If opportunity doesn’t knock, build a door.” – Milton Berle
“An attitude of positive expectation is the mark of the superior personality.”  - Brian Tracy
“Success consists of going from failure to failure without loss of enthusiasm.” – Winston Churchill
“If you can dream it, then you can achieve it. You will get all you want in life if you help enough other people get what they want.” – Zig Ziglar
“The only place where your dream becomes impossible is in your own thinking.” – Robert H Schuller
“We don’t see things as they are, we see them as we are.” – Anais Nin
“Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.” – Thomas Edison
“I may not have gone where I intended to go, but I think I have ended up where I needed to be.” –Douglas Adams
“Learning is a gift. Even when pain is your teacher.” - Maya Watson
“I’ve had a lot of worries in my life, most of which never happened” – Mark Twain
“You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection.” –Buddha
“Hope is a waking dream.” – Aristotle
“The past has no power over the present moment.” – Eckhart Tolle
“Happiness is an attitude. We either make ourselves miserable, or happy and strong. The amount of work is the same.” – Francesca Reigler
“I do believe we’re all connected. I do believe in positive energy. I do believe in the power of prayer. I do believe in putting good out into the world. And I believe in taking care of each other.” - Harvey Fierstein
“If you want light to come into your life, you need to stand where it is shining.” – Guy Finley
“Today is a new beginning, a chance to turn your failures into achievements & your sorrows into so goods. No room for excuses.” - Joel Brown
“Life is a gift, and it offers us the privilege, opportunity, and responsibility to give something back by becoming more.” – Tony Robbins
“We are all here for some special reason. Stop being a prisoner of your past. Become the architect of your future.” – Robin Sharma
“If you think you can do a thing or think you can’t do a thing, you’re right.” – Henry Ford
“No matter what the situation, remind yourself “I have a choice.” – Deepak Chopra
“All you can change is yourself, but sometimes that changes everything!” – Gary W Goldstein
“The will to win, the desire to succeed, the urge to reach your full potential… these are the keys that will unlock the door to personal excellence.” – Confucius
“If we’re growing, we’re always going to be out of our comfort zone.” – John C Maxwell
“Take chances, make mistakes. That’s how you grow. Pain nourishes your courage. You have to fail in order to practice being brave.” – Mary Tyler Moore
“I am the greatest, I said that even before I knew I was.” – Muhammad Ali
“We are responsible for what we are, and whatever we wish ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves.” – Swami Vivekananda
“The difference between stumbling blocks and stepping stones is how you use them.” – Unknown
“If someone tells you, “You can’t” they really mean, “I can’t.” – Sean Stephenson
“There is little difference in people, but that little difference makes a big difference. The little difference is attitude. The big difference is whether it is positive or negative.” – W. Clement Stone
“Whatever you want to do, do it now. There are only so many tomorrows.” – Michael Landon
“When I do good, I feel good. When I do bad, I feel bad. That’s my religion.” – Abraham Lincoln
“The difference in winning and losing is most often…not quitting.” – Walt Disney
“You are never too old to set another goal or dream a new dream.” – C.S Lewis
“All things are difficult before they are easy.” – Thomas Fuller
“Success is falling nine times and getting up ten.” – Jon Bon Jovi
“Happiness, like unhappiness, is a proactive choice.” – Stephen Covey
“Be soft. Do not let the world make you hard. Do not let pain make you hate. Do not let the bitterness steal your sweetness. Take pride that even though the rest of the world may disagree, you still believe it to be a beautiful place.” – Kurt Vonnegut
“You must make a decision that you are going to move on. It wont happen automatically. You will have to rise up and say, ‘I don’t care how hard this is, I don’t care how disappointed I am, I’m not going to let this get the best of me. I’m moving on with my life.” – Joel Osteen
“The next time you feel slightly uncomfortable with the pressure in your life, remember no pressure, no diamonds. Pressure is a part of success.” - Eric Thomas
“When the world pushes you to your knees, you’re in the perfect position to pray.” – Rumi
“If you can change your mind, you can change your life.” – William James
“When we are no longer able to change a situation, we are challenged to change ourselves.” –Viktor Frankl
“Happiness often sneaks in through a door you didn’t know you left open.” – John Barrymore
“The best way to gain self-confidence is to do what you are afraid to do.” – Unknown