Step 3_Making Behavioral Changes



In order to deal with your depression, you must change what you are doing; either your thinking or your behaviors.  At times, it is much easier to change your behaviors.   By changing your behaviors, you can learn to cope with depression and feel better.   By changing your behaviors, you can develop new, healthier thought patterns that can help you overcome depression

In previous posts, we had you write down your thoughts and beliefs and corresponding behaviors and feelings.  If you go back and look at what you wrote down, you will notice that you probably acted on autopilot; acted before you stopped to think about the consequences.  Look specifically at how you behaved.

 What helped you cope and get through it?
 What didn't I do or what did I avoid doing?
 What automatic reactions did I have?
 What would other people have seen me doing?
 What were the consequences of what I did? What happened later because of it? Did it affect the way I felt later?

Now ask yourself, what could I have done differently?

 What would someone else have done in that situation? (it might help to think about particular people that you know, and what they might have  done differently)
 Have there been times in the past when I would have done something else?
 If I had paused, and taken a breath, what would I have done?

Write down several options that you might have done differently if it had occurred 
to you, then ask yourself:

 If I had tried that, how would the situation have been different?
 How would it have affected what I felt?
 How would it have affected what I thought?
 Would it have been more helpful or effective for me, another person or for
the situation?
 What would the consequences have been of doing something different?

If we tend to act on autopilot, what can be done to reverse the tendency?  The STOP and ACE methods mentioned below, when put into practice, can help you change your behaviors and thus your thoughts and feelings.    


The STOP model can help you change your behaviors and thus your thoughts and feelings.


When considering your options, ask yourself:

 Will it be effective and appropriate?
 Is it in proportion to the event?
 Is it in keeping with my values and principles? 
 What will be the consequences of my action?
 What is best for me and most helpful for this situation?

In addition to using the STOP model to help you change your behaviors, you need to schedule events every day which give you a sense of: Achievement, Closeness to others and Enjoyment

 It's important to get a healthy balance of activities which give you a sense  of achievement, enjoyment and being close to others. Choose activities which are important to you, have positive meanings, or are purposeful, and  you might want to plan rest periods too.
 Keep your goals realistic – set achievable limits. E.g. aim to walk for 15 minutes rather than a half-marathon, or wash the dishes rather than spring clean the whole house. Don’t set yourself up to fail! You can build up your activity over time.

Use the ACE Log and STOP worksheets below to help you manage and change your behaviors, change your thought patterns and feel less depressed.

ACE Log Worksheet

STOP Worksheet


               