You can use the tool below to help you effectively analyze your thoughts and actions that are causing your depression.   You can use the tool daily to learn to control and change your cognitive distortions and rid yourself from depression.  

First I provide a chart of the cognitive distortions and their meanings.

Secondly, I provide an example of how to use the form.

Lastly I provide the form for you to use on  a daily basis to help you learn to deal with your depression

Cognitive Distortions:


Cognitive Distortion
Meaning
All-or-Nothing Thinking
The tendency to see everything in absolutes; black or white
Mental Filter
Focusing on only one aspect of a situation; usually one negative aspect
Discounting the positive
Focusing only on the negative and negating the positive
Overgeneralization
When we use language like “always”, “never” “can’t” “impossible” “that’s just my luck”
Jumping to Conclusions
Mind reading and fortune telling;
Magnification
Glorifying or Magnifying problems and minimizing positive situations
Emotional Reasoning
Evaluating a situation based on how you feel: I feel… therefore I think…
Should Statements
Thinking in absolutes. Should statements are self-defeating because “they” assume we are perfect
Labeling
When we think the behavior represents the person rather than just focusing on the behavior as a separate event. 
Personalization and Blame
Blaming yourself or just one person when there are many factors that contributed to the situation

Example:

Here’s What Happened:


 I gave a very important presentation at work today. It was a flop.  I’m sure to get demoted or fired.


I Feel:


















My Negative Thoughts Are:
 I always give bad presentations.

 My manager is going to tell my boss and I’ll get demoted or fired.

 I hate having to deal with this.  This is going to ruin my whole life.

You will now choose from the drop down menu the cognitive distortions that represent your negative thoughts. 










You will now practice replacing your negative thoughts/cognitive distortions with rational, healthy thoughts.

My Rational Thoughts Are:
 I know my presentation had some impact because my coworkers were taking notes and nodding their heads.

 I have no idea what my manger was thinking.  She’s obviously very busy and probably did not have time to speak with me yet.  I will be sure to check in with her first thing tomorrow

 This is not the end of the world.  This is something I can manage and control.  If I need to make some adjustments, I will work harder next time.  I’m grateful for my life.


Now I Feel:















Active Tool:


Powered byEMF Contact Form