Study after study of depressed people has proven if they infuse exercise into their daily routines; they most assuredly learn how to deal with depression, prevent depression from occurring and even overcome depression. Exercise releases endorphins in our brain that cause physical and mental pleasure, clear and positive thought patterns, and confidence and security.      In fact, the benefits of daily exercise include the following mental and physical benefits:

Increased feeling of well-being
Improved mental clarity resulting in positive thoughts
Improved sleeping patterns
Diminished symptoms of depression
Enhanced memory and concentration
Greater control over thoughts and feelings
Raised self-esteem and confidence
Reduced craving to harmful co-dependencies
Improved eating habits; specifically appetite suppression and weight loss that follows
Heightened blood flow to the brain causing increased alertness and focus
Better circulation
Enhanced digestion
Diminished cholesterol levels
Lowered blood pressure
Better regulation of blood sugar
Heightened energy levels through production of endorphins, which causes increased happiness
Diminished skeletal muscle tension
Discharge of built up frustrations and worries
Diminished production of too much adrenaline; excess adrenaline keeps us in uncomfortable mental states such has depression, anger and anxiety
Increased ability to learn how to deal with depression


Wow!! Just look how powerful daily exercise can be to our psychological, physical and physiological well-beings!!

So, the benefits above highlight the importance of all depressed people learning to infuse some form of exercise into their daily routine.  But for many depressed people the thought of exercising, let alone getting out of bed, is too much to bear.  For many, during states of depression, their energy and motivation levels are diminished.  So, how do you garner up the strength during times of depression to learn to incorporate or maintain an exercise regimen that will help you learn to effectively deal with, prevent and combat depression?  We will help you deal with the answer to this answer below.  In the meantime, begin to think about exercises that you've enjoyed or think you would enjoy.  Exercises such as: walking, jogging, yoga, hiking, gardening, biking, skiing, dancing, singing, swimming, roller blading, skate boarding, weight lifting, manual labor, etc.


If you find it difficult to get out of bed or simply motivated to exercise;  simply sit where you are and do neck rolls, leg lifts, bicycle motion with your legs, arm raises, simple yoga poses or just any simple body movements you can do to begin to get your blood flowing and adrenaline pumping to help you get up and move more.  Once you’re up, simply walk through your dwelling space (maybe up the stairs) for 5-10 minutes and possibly venture outside and walk around your yard, garden or take a stroll around the block.  
Begin slow as you learn to include exercise into your daily routine of learning to overcome and prevent depression. 

If you’ve isolated yourself from others, it’s ok to exercise within the confines of your dwelling space.  If you don’t have an exercise bike or treadmill, there are many wonderful exercise free programs you can access via YouTube.  Or if you are willing to purchase some form of exercise DVD, that would be awesome. 


It may  be helpful for you to vary the exercises you complete on a weekly basis.  A variation can help break the monotony and keep you more motivated.    Use the chart below to discover the types of activities you would like to try. 

Exercise
Will Incorporate into Daily Routine Now
Hope to Attempt and Incorporate Later

Biking



Walking



Yoga



Running



Hiking



Gardening



Yoga



Weight Lifting



Aerobic DVD, Class or Program



Dancing



Rock Climbing



Swimming



Manual Labor



Roller Blading



Kayaking



Skiing



Boxing



You may find it more motivating and successful if you exercise in a group or with a good friend.  As we know, being with others is one awesome way to combat and fight depression.  So, check your local gyms or clubs take tours and find one that seems comfortable to you.  Tap into the one non-judgmental, compassionate friend, neighbor or relative to walk with you in the mall or to hike with you in the wilderness etc.

In order for exercise to help you effectively manage your depression, you must do it regularly.  It needs to become a part of your daily routine.  Use the chart below, or here, to keep track of your daily exercise routines. 

Also, your exercise sessions only need to last anywhere from 15 to 60 minute depending on your activity and personal preference.  On some days, just going for a 15 minute walk will lift your depression.  On other days, a 30 minute bike ride will help you sustain your current positive mood for days to come.


Lastly, it’s always more difficult to exercise after a depressive episode or downward shift in mood, but remember that if you force yourself to exercise during these time, you will come out stronger and ready to combat your depression.  And sometimes, you may have to stray from your exercise routine when you get the urge to exercise.  If your body and mind are telling you to exercise now, go for it.  Also, for many it’s best to get up first thing in the morning and exercise.  

Daily Exercise Record Sheet
Week (s) of: ____________________

Date
How you feel before exercising on a scale of 1 - 10
Description of Exercise
Length of Exercise Routine
How you feel after exercising