Some of you may know of Stuart Scott, the famous ESPN analyst who battled cancer for seven years and lost the battle just a few days ago.  He has touched the hearts and souls of many as an analyst and more importantly through the courage and positivity he demonstrated has he battled cancer for seven years. 

He was diagnosed with an extremely rare form of cancer about seven years ago and seemingly always continued to fight with the most positive attitude.  He had some extremely rough times when his body would shut down and he had to be rushed into surgery, or when nothing seemed to work and he had to wait patiently to see if he qualified for experimental medications, many times not qualifying.  As he fought for his life, he remained positive and attacked life with vigor and determination that ultimately stemmed from his thought patterns. 

As you continue to battle depression or any other emotional battle, please remember the power of your thoughts and thought patterns.  And please remember that you can overcome your depression and change your thoughts, behaviors and feelings.  Is it easy, no way?  Is it possible, of course? 

But you are not alone nor should you be alone as you journey to deal with your depression.  As Stuart Scott mentioned in the video below, he would not have made it as long as he did without the help of many.  He had faith in the wonderful abilities of the doctors and nurses who treated him.  He counted on his girlfriend for unwavering support.  And when he wanted to just cry, he knew exactly who he could call so he could just cry without being judged.  When he was too tired to go on, he laid down and rested; just to get up when rested and continue to battle. 

You too need to know who you can count on to help you overcome your depression. There are many great online resources and tools that can help you.    If you feel like you need the assistance of a trained counselor, please seek one out as they can hopefully provide the nonjudgmental, professional abilities you need to move out of your depression.   Lastly, who can you count on to just cry to if needed?   There has to be someone out there, a friend or family member, you can count on to shed your tears to.  If not, seek the help of a trained counselor or psychologist.


Please watch the video below and hopefully you will find some inspiration in Stuart’s story, words and actions.  At the very least, I hope you will be able to shed some tears and know that you too can overcome any obstacle that stands in your way!!