Take the time to listen to the wonderful and encouraging words by Les Brown in the video below. If you listen to Mr. Brown’s words multiple times daily, I think you will find that it energizes you and will help you accomplish your goals and overcome your obstacles. If you apply the principles he talks about in his speech, I think you will surely begin to see results.


Summary of video:

:15   Are you getting what you want out of life?  You have great music within you, are you sharing it with the world?  If you are not getting what you want out of life, you owe it yourself to get everything your heart desires; It’s your one life to live

1:21  Most people fight, resist change, yet they continue to live with regret.  How can change be any worse than your current situation?  People think that they have to wait for all of the pieces to fit together, before they change.  Life does not work that way.  The universe does not work that way.  Begin to act now, today, without all the pieces in place, and you will begin to see results.

2:08  Whatever you want to accomplish or overcome; you’ve got what it takes to be successful.  The universe is on your side; the stars are aligned for you.  Repeat that to yourself daily and begin to take baby steps towards what your heart desires.  Once you take these measures, you will see how things will begin to change for you.   It will not be easy. Nothing worthwhile is easy.  There will be pain, but life is full of pain; there is no gain without pain.  If you don’t change you feel the pain of regret; If only I would have…If I had to do it all over again… Regret is pain. Regardless, there is going to be pain.  Would you rather have the pain of regret or the temporary pain of change resulting from what your heart desires; which ultimately leads to you being happy and successful! 

4:17 For many of us, our doubt and lack of change is governed by the opinions of others; especially those close to us.  If we have an idea that’s in our hearts and our excited about and those important to us shoot it down, we don’t pursue our hearts desires. We listen to the external factors that do not know what our hearts desires.  Do not let others control you. 

5:31 Be courageous; follow your dreams. The word Courageous is French and means: DO WHAT IS IN YOUR HEART.  It takes courage to live – step out and let go.  Manifest your dreams (those things in your heart) by acting daily in the direction you want to go.  You have nothing to lose.  Live with a sense of urgency as we never know when this could be the end!!  There are no guarantees; what are you waiting for!! 

8:12 Listen to yourself and your hearts desires.  You know what is best for you and exactly what you want.  GO for it!

9:56  Once you start listening to yourself and acting accordingly, things start to open up for you in the direction you want to go.  Focus on what you want, be proactive and act every day in that direction and you will find that the universe is aligned with you; the world will begin to go your way.  For that which we focus on, will begin to multiple and out that begets greatness. 

11:00  A great writer once said; All you can do is all you can do.  And all you can do is good enough to make your dreams come true!!