Starting a blog is tricky.

On the one hand, I want readers to have enough information about me to care about what I say and eventually lapse into healthy, occasional worship of me. On the other hand, I don't want to give out so much information that a potential stalker could show up at my door with my favourite kind of cheesecake and five of my least-hated romantic comedies on DVD. Since I'm terrible at finding that kind of balance, I'll just start by letting you know that I like Oreo cheesecake.


My hobbies include pretending internet privacy is still a thing in 2013.

Since, I am not, to my knowledge, some kind of sentient fungus, I come complete with a back story. I was born twenty-one years ago in Moncton, New Brunswick, which, despite being a 'major' Canadian city, is the sort of place that you can only find on a map if you grew up near it. 



It's here, in case you were wondering.

Unfortunately, Moncton just didn't offer the sorts of transportation-related employment that my parents required, and so they packed up their wrinkly red raisin of an offspring and went west to Edmonton, Alberta, where I currently reside. Despite its abundance of large, predatory mammals and its apocalyptic winters, I've managed to survive here for year after year without ever resorting to cannibalism; I consider that to be a personal victory.

 A point of pride for any city.

Intrepid readers may have noticed the 'Publications' tab on this page, and deduced that I like to write things. Dull readers may have entirely missed that before they read the previous sentence. Yes, I count myself among the legions of struggling, unrecognized writers in the world. Yes, I have an ever-growing body of unpublished Word documents stashed away on my hard drive. No, I haven't yet started the process of submitting my literary offspring to the world. In fact, that's why I started this blog - I'm just not selfish enough to deny the voyeurs of the world the opportunity to follow my successes and many, many failures in the publishing world. Stay tuned for plenty of that. 

Now, since I'm not exactly fond of living on the dog-food-and-ramen diet of most struggling artists, I have more going on in my life than a big, unpublished novel (which will be discussed later). I'm a fourth-year university student, and after a gigantic, melodramatic breakdown at the end of my second year (which would also be an excellent topic for a future post), I decided to pursue Forensic Psychology as a career. If anyone out there decided to abandon my blog after learning I'm a struggling writer, but inexplicably carried on to this paragraph, rest assured that psychology is just one of the many topics I'm interested in incessantly talking about.

After four years of school, I've learned that these work better when they're still inside your head.

For now, that's all you need to know. First blog posts are universally awkward, banal and overlooked, and I'm afraid that this one isn't much different. Since I'm incapable of functioning if I'm not given deadlines to adhere to, this blog will be updated every weekend, with posts on a variety of topics. If you'd be awesome enough to spam my blog across every social media outlet you have access to, you would earn my eternal gratitude, kindly anonymous blog readers. See you next week with something more worthwhile.

How did this introductory blog post stack up to others that you've read? Let me know in the comments. 