Yes, it's true and we live in the "sunbelt." For the next 24 hours, the forecast is for more snow, rain, sleet, and ice. Temperatures are supposed to drop to the mid-teens and remain cold until Sunday. It is pretty (looking out my office window) and as long as we do not have a power failure, do not run out of food (just kidding), or do not have a medical emergency, we should be okay.

I often comment about how wonderful it is to live in the woods on the ridge above a lake. We are more than a football field off the end of the road and up another hill. If cars cannot make it up the hill on the main road to our house, we do not even consider trying to get out. It is a small price to pay for the joy of living here in God's country.

At times like this I once again realize that even if I had to get out for some reason, I couldn't. Walking on snow-covered ice is just not something I can do anymore. My brother-in-law, a schoolteacher, had a difficult time getting home this afternoon. He also lives on a hill. He had to park his truck at the bottom of the hill and walk up.

A couple of neighbors who live on the lake called and asked if we were okay. I said no and begged them to bring up some food … knowing that no one is making it up this hill. Fred, my beagle, and I made it out for three walks today before the snow began to stick to the roads. My rear-wheel, light weight, golf cart just does not do well on any slick surface. We probably will not get out again until Sunday if the forecast is correct.

This weather would not even be a concern in Minnesota. Yet, the local stations are telling people to "not go out unless it is an emergency." Schools closed for the entire day or closed early, and the DOT started spraying salty brine on the roads beginning early this morning. The local stations have replaced normal programming with constant weather updates and film of how bad conditions are in the area. They are comparing this storm to the blizzard of '93 (one of the worst in history).

Fortunately, I have a good book and excellent company (my wife, Fred, and our two cats). What more could you ask for?