As the disease progresses, I have found that I need to adjust how I live. I have come up with ways to make my life easier. Several others with Kennedy's Disease have also shared their thoughts. Below is a list of some of these ideas. The list is not meant to be all-inclusive, but rather just a starting point.

Chairs: Chair height becomes a problem. It becomes much more difficult and eventually almost impossible to stand up from a normal chair. Initially, you can build up the chair height by adding a platform under the chair. A couple of 2x4s and ¾-inch plywood make it much easier to stand up. Another way is to buy dense foam seat cushions (one or two). These will often add 2-4 inches of height to any chair and often that is all that is needed. These are two inexpensive ways to make rising from a favorite chair easier. Later on, you might have to move to an 'uplift seat'. This device lifts you up and pushes you forward to help you stand up. Eventually, you might need to purchase a power recliner chair. This chair uses an electric motor to raise you up and move you forward to an almost standing position.
Sofas: You could experiment using bed risers (leg extensions) under the legs of the sofa to increase the height. You need to check this out to make certain it is safe (supportive), however. You can also build a platform similar to the chair platform mentioned above. Some people have added a front toe-kick to make it look nicer.
Beds: Bed risers are perfect for increasing the height of a bed. Ever since I added risers to our bed, I have never strained to get up. Some people have used bed elevators to increase the head of the bed for easier sleeping. I found that using a foam wedge (6" high) is quite comfortable and helps me breathe easier.
Toilets: I recommend buying a taller toilet that is designed for handicap use. It will raise the seat height about two inches. There are also several devices to increase the height of the seat. Some of these are inexpensive while others are very expensive. One device that I use that is inexpensive and yet very helpful is called a 'Tallete'. It is a molded plastic seat that sits on top of the toilet. They make them in various shapes to fit different toilet shapes. A 'Tallete' adds about 4" of height. I actually have two of them. I keep one in the van in case a handicap stall is not available. There are also devices on the market that have mechanical or motorized seats that lift you up. These type devices are more expensive, however.
Portable Ramps: There are several types of ramps that will allow you access to homes that have stairs. These ramps vary in height from five to ten feet. Some fold and others roll up. The major problem with most ramps is that they are heavy and awkward to handle. I also have a small aluminum ramp (3'x3') that allows me to go out of the house onto our rear deck and front porch while in my wheelchair.
Opening Jars: This becomes more of a problem as your hand strength weakens. One person recommended using Craftsman strap wrenches. They come in a couple of sizes for different size jars and bottles. I use a tool that is specifically designed for opening jars and bottles. It is called the "Oxo Goof Grip Jar Opener." This device has a handle on one end and a 'V' shaped head with a serrated edge on one side that allows you to open almost any size jar.
Grabber: One tool that is nice to have around the house and garage is a 'reach and grab' device. Most allow you to adjust the length. They have a handle on one end and a grabber on the other. If something drops to the floor or rolls under something, these devices are very handy.
Pant Leg Cuff Clips – When I am outside in the winter, I cannot keep my legs warm. The wind blows up my pant legs … brrrrr! I found that pant leg cuff clips for bicyclist are an inexpensive, yet practical way to help eliminate that problem. These stainless steel circular clips cost $3-5, but provide good protection when you have to be out in the cold on a windy day.
As always, I would appreciate hearing from you on what makes your life easier (either in the comment section below or you can email me).