Kennedy’s Disease is a progressive neurological disorder. Fortunately, there are tools to progressively provide greater support and mobility when you need it. Unfortunately, if your ego is anything like mine, it gets in the way of your timing, purchase and use of these tools.

Cane: For example, I should have started using a cane way before I did. If I would have, there would have far less falls, and a few less injuries. Using a good quality cane would have been an easy transition; yet, my ego would not let me use one. It took a broken fibula to force me to finally try using one. Once I started, I loved it because it provided me with greater confidence and more support.

Tip: The cane should be adjusted to the proper height so that your forearm is bent at a 25-30 degree angle when the cane is parallel with your leg (straight down your side). The cane should have a grip that is easy to hold on to and an end-tip that does not slip. For better balance while walking, look straight ahead (not down).

Walker: A walker should have been another easy transition, but … my darn ego got in the way again. I could not picture myself using a walker under any circumstances. It took another serious injury before I progressed to using one. I also found that I didn’t need the walker all of the time, but it sure was a useful tool when I needed it.

Tip: The walker height should be set so that your posture is upright and your forearms are bent at a 25-30 degree angle when grasping the walker. The walker is meant for balance, not for holding up your weight. For better balance while walking, look straight ahead (not down). Tennis balls placed on the end tips help improve traction on slippery surfaces.

Scooter: On the other hand, a scooter was far easier for me to accept. Even though a wheelchair would have been a smarter purchase at the time, I could not envision myself in a wheelchair. Somehow, however, I could see myself using the Evil Knievel endorsed four-wheel scooter. I figured anybody that could jump over twenty school buses or attempt to jump across the Snake River in a rocket-sled must know something about scooters. I wanted something that would allow me to go with my wife when she went for walks. I needed a scooter that would take me back into the wilds of southern Pennsylvania.

Unfortunately, I did not use my head and spend a few more bucks for a model that would be more versatile and allow me to go into the woods without getting consistently stuck. Now that would have been a worthwhile investment. I also learned quickly that a scooter does not have the maneuverability of a wheelchair and is much more difficult to transport. My Evil Knievel special did not allow me to jump anything … not even a small branch in the path. Bummer!

Wheelchair: It took a broken tibia and fibula before I finally progressed to a power wheelchair. This was a good investment and well worthwhile. We also bought a platform lift (another good investment) that allows the wheelchair to be lifted into the van and actually charged while in transit. The wheelchair allowed me to go for walks with my wife and attend community events (both inside and outside) without the fear of falling or becoming too fatigued. I no longer slowed down the other walkers and normally they wear down before my battery does. Being able to travel 25-30 miles on a charge and cruise around at 5-6 mph works well for almost any situation. Once again, however, I missed the boat. Even though it has opened many doors (opportunities) for me, a little more research and a few more bucks invested up front would have really made a difference.

By now you should see the pattern (waited too long, didn't consider my needs, and was too cheap). In my next post I will provide some thoughts about what to do and not to do concerning these mobility aids. Until then, stay upright and safe.