Yesterday I discussed my progression into the world of mobility aids. Through the process, I learned several things that I wanted to share with you.
Don’t wait until you are injured to consider a mobility aid (cane, walker, scooter, or wheelchair). Your life does not have to come to a stop and can still be enjoyed with the right mobility equipment.
Don’t just consider your current needs. Also take into consideration your future needs (what you might need within the next five years, for example). Then, look at what you have recently given up because of your safety concerns. Are there devices or options that will allow you to once again safely enjoy life a little more fully. For example, if you can no longer stand for long, would a chair that has a seat that rises up be helpful so that everyone does not have to look down while talking with you? Do you need a chair that can climb a curb, stairs, or be capable of cruising through the woods? Almost everything is available today, but it comes with a price.
Don’t be too frugal (or in my case cheap). You are talking about your safety, lifestyle, and future mobility. A few extra bucks spent upfront could make all the difference in the world to your safety and happiness.
Do ask for advice from others regarding potential needs, options, makes, models, etc.
Do consult with a physical and occupational therapist. For scooters and wheelchairs, we are talking a major investment (even if the insurance company pays for most of it). For canes and walkers, therapists know how to adjust them correctly and what you should be considering. Their expertise could be very beneficial as well as save you some grief down the road.
Do shop around. The internet is an excellent place to check on prices, options, models, and suppliers, but it is not the only place. Visit a show room and ‘test drive’ the models you are considering.
Don’t just consider cost. Warning: Cost is not the only factor when purchasing a scooter or wheelchair. In my opinion, ‘service’ is far more important. No matter how good a deal you get, if you are stranded somewhere, it is no fun. Ask for recommendations from other users. If you do decide to buy online or from some out-of-area supplier, have a local repair facility lined up. Talk with them ahead of time and make certain they can service your vehicle (warranty and regular service).
Don’t be afraid to negotiate. As mentioned, a scooter or wheelchair is a major investment. If you have done your research, shopped around, and considered all of your options, you will know what the best deal is.
I hope these two posts on mobility equipment provide ‘food for thought’. If you have other suggestions or questions, please do not hesitate to comment below.