If you are a frequent reader of my blog, you are aware of my feelings on the benefits of a regular exercise and stretching program. I exercise every day. I alternate between heavy (90+ minutes) and light days (30+ minutes). I exercise in the morning and in the evening. I don’t expect everyone to be as crazy as I am, but I do hope everyone will find a comfortable exercise routine that become part of your everyday routine.

Pulmonary and cardiac benefits, as well as joint lubrication and muscle memory, are the main reason I exercise. If I didn’t feel I was receiving any benefits from the routine, I wouldn’t do it.

Finding your own exercise program and routine is important. For that reason, I am including links to several articles on exercise and exercise programs. There are many more available on the internet, but these might be of benefit. As always, before starting any exercise program, discuss it with your doctor. And, if possible, have a physical therapist work with you initially to evaluate and recommend a program that fits your particular needs.
Of course, the KDA has two PDF exercise guides that might be of interest. The "Smart Exercise Guide - Part II" is one I still use. The exercises were developed by a physical therapist familiar with progressive disorders. The key to this program is the 70% rule. The "Smart Exercise Guide - Part I" is a fourteen-page guide of other exercises including pool therapy exercises, exercises for sedentary people.
A MedScape paper on “Rehabilitation Management of Neuromuscular Disease” is interesting. If you read nothing else in the paper, read “Exercise paradigms to improve strength.”
The MDA has a PDF called, “Exercising with a Muscle Disease.” It is more a 34-page general Q & A guide developed from Quest articles about exercise for someone living with these type conditions.
“If You Have Muscular Dystrophy, What Is a Good Exercise Routine?” is a brief overview – more a fluff piece in my opinion. It highlights some basics that you might find interesting.
“Training Clients with Neuromuscular Disorders” is an interesting approach to exercising. It focuses on the person providing the training. There are a number of good tips and considerations for anyone living with these type conditions.
“Rehabilitation Management of Neuromuscular Disease: The Role of Exercise Training” is a 2009 PDF report on current studies on exercise.