The dictionary defines "giving up" as a verbal act of admitting defeat or the act of forsaking.
"Giving in", on the other hand, is defined as consenting reluctantly or yielding to an outside pressure, wish or opinion. 


For a long time I viewed "giving in" to this disease as being defeated by it. Because I am a very competitive person, I will not "give up" on anything without a fight. Often this perspective on life resulted in me falling. Some of these falls resulted in me breaking a bone or causing some other injury. When I look back over the last ten years, most of my injuries were preventable. If I had accepted the possibility of an injury at the time, I would have acted more responsibly and possibly never have fallen.

Ever since I broke the tibia and fibula, however, I have been far more accepting of the notion that it is better to error on the side of being safe. Yes, I am less mobile today, but, on the other hand, I have not had a fall or injury in over thirty-two months (my name is Bruce and I am a recovering chronic faller).

Acceptance for me has not come easy. Fortunately, my wife (the smarter one in our family) is a motivating factor in this evolving process (her training method - the carrot or the stick). Moving to a "class 3" wheelchair, using a lift-chair, shower stool, and commode seat-lift are four recent examples of me considering safety first. I believe these are all moves in the right direction.

I have not given up. I have just accepted more of my limitations. With this acceptance, I am safer and happier. Acceptance does not help the frustration that I still feel as the disease progresses. It just means smarter decisions are being made that make my life easier and removes some of the stress from my wife.


 
Please feel free to comment. By taking a moment to share your thoughts you add much to these articles. The articles then become more than just something I said or believe. In addition, by adding a comment, you might just be helping the next reader by sharing your opinion, experience, or a helpful tip. You can comment by clicking on "comments" below or by sending me an email. I look forward to hearing from you.