The Kennedy's Disease Association (KDA) is considering updating its website. It was designed about ten years ago and because of certain programming and knowledge restrictions, we have not made any major changes to the look and feel of the site in several years. It is still a valuable site and comments continue to roll in about it being the greatest resource out there for those seeking information on Kennedy's Disease.


I feel that even though it is a good site, it does not tell "our" (yours and my) story. In our new and improved site, I am hoping that by using videos and slide shows we can better explain how Kennedy's Disease affects our lives as well as what research is doing to help find that treatment or cure. Stories could be as simple as this one or more like these on the MS website. What is important, however, is that we keep the message fresh and interesting. The site needs to regularly draw people back and make it easier for first-time visitors to find the information they are looking for.

We are also considering aligning our sub-pages (headers) around the KDA objectives.
Promote Research
This section and sub-pages will provide the latest information on Kennedy's Disease research and the latest clinical trials.

Share Information
This section and sub-pages will provide information on 'What is Kennedy's Disease', Medical Information, KDA Guides, General Tips, Current News, and other resources.
Provide Support
This section and sub-pages will have information on the KDA Forum, KDA Chat Room, Support Groups, Contacts and Memorials.
Increase Awareness
This section and sub-pages will have information on current Campaigns, Doctor's Brochures and General Public Brochures.
 
We will also have two other headers.
About the KDA
This section and sub-pages will have information on The KDA Story, Board of Directors, Scientific Review Board, Published Articles, Annual Reports, the Guestbook, how to contact us and how to Join the KDA.

Help the KDA
This section and sub-pages will provide information on how to Make a Donation, Shop Online, Make a Pledge, Raise Funds, Volunteer your time, and use the KDA Store.

Nothing is cast in stone yet and that is why I am asking my readers for their opinions of what we should be considering for the "new look." I would appreciate your thoughts and hopefully some examples of sites that you find fresh and interesting. What would you do to improve our website and make it more interesting for new as well as regular visitors?

I look forward to reading your comments and emails.