I am almost healed and it feels good to be among the living again.  Since I started taking Dustasteride, I have been keeping a journal.  I reviewed it today and these are some of my observations about the last five days.


Saturday I missed my first day of exercises in over three years … just too weak.  And, I had to move my long program from Monday to this morning because of weakness and an upset stomach.  I really missed my exercise routine.  I knew I had to “get back on the horse” this morning and fortunately I could.  By this afternoon, I noticed some muscle soreness. 
Fasciculations increased dramatically for some reason.  The facial and hand tremors were the most obvious.  I will have to ask my neurologist if he is understands why.  I still have more noticeable twitching in the arms and hands today.
Leg and abdominal muscle weakness was the most pronounced.  My ability to stand up from a chair and my balance were the most effected.  I am assuming that the legs are weaker because they are carrying 180# of weight.  Why would the abdominal muscles be so weak?
I noticed a greater weakness in the left side of my body.  I know that muscle weakness is asymmetrical in those of us living with Kennedy’s Disease.  I question why the left side when my dominant side is the right?
During my long exercise program today, I noticed my upper body strength today was very good … perhaps 90% of normal while my lower body was still 70-75%.  Abdominal strength is somewhere in between.
Because of the wasting of the facial and upper body muscles, I look much thinner after only a few days of not, or only lightly, eating.  Two neighbors commented that I looked thin or asked if I was dieting.
My wife takes far better care of me than I do.  Saturday I ate like I was well again (a cheeseburger, ice cream, and shrimp pasta with garlic-butter sauce).  Come Saturday night and Sunday, I paid the price the price for overindulgence.  When my wife took control of my wellbeing I quickly began to mend.

I am perhaps over-analyzing this, but I find it interesting.  I also hope to learn from my mistakes (that would be a first).