The last couple of weeks have been such a rollercoaster ride for most Americans.  Our government leaders having been playing politics again.  Instead of doing what is best for the people, they are just sandbagging and finger pointing.  The instability they have caused in world markets (questioning our credit  worthiness) makes it easy to become a little upset and worried.


Just when about everything that I saw on TV or read in the papers or on the web is “gloom and doom,” I received the following email.

WHY I'M DEPRESSED!

Over five thousand years ago, Moses said to the children of Israel , "Pick up your shovels, mount your asses and camels, and I will lead you to the Promised Land."
Nearly 75 years ago, (when Welfare was introduced) Roosevelt said, "Lay down your shovels, sit on your asses, and light up a Camel, this  is the Promised Land."

Today, Congress has stolen your shovel, taxed your asses, raised the price of Camels and mortgaged the Promised Land!

I was so depressed last night thinking about Health Care Plans, the economy, the wars, lost jobs, savings, Social Security, retirement funds, the stock market fall, etc ... that I called a Suicide Hotline. 

I had to press ‘1’ for English.  I was connected to a call center in Pakistan. I told them I was suicidal. They got excited and asked if I could drive a truck......
Folks, we're screwed!
  Laughter is the best medicine

It is said that “laughter is the best medicine” and I couldn’t agree
   more.  I laughed when I read the joke the first time.  And, as I forwarded the email on to several friends I was still laughing.  While writing this article today I am smiling again.
  We all need to laugh … some of us more than others

Mark Train said, “Against the assault of laughter nothing can stand.”

Wil Dieck mentions in an article on “relieving stress and anxiety” that:

“A healthy daily dose of laughter is an excellent method to relieve your stress and anxiety. Laughter can replace your stressful, anxious feelings with a sense of joy that gives you the strength to overcome the obstacles you face. When you laugh with your family and friends you also enhance your relationships.
 
In addition, laughter is one of the world’s greatest health secrets. Enjoying silly moments and funny jokes is a great method for overcoming the stress in your life and can help you feel more relaxed and less tense. Studies have shown that laughter may even promote a healing response within your body.”
 
Dieck also provides some tips on helping to relieve anxiety and stress:

Make morning a happy time. Dedicate twenty minutes to whole-hearted laughter in the morning. For best results, practice this exercise with your entire family.
Figure out what tickles your funny bone. This process of lighthearted discovery alone can increase your sense of joy and happiness almost overnight.
Hang around happy people. Happy people like to laugh and they spread the bug of laughter. A healthy sense of humor is highly infectious.
Find humor in your mistakes. One thing about being human is that we all make mistakes. Be willing to laugh at yours. Enjoy the humor of your humanity.
Tell people the funny things that happen to you. Funny things are happening around you all the time. Squeeze every ounce of joy you can out of them by sharing them with others.

Three things that work for me
 
I find that certain movies make me laugh no matter how many times I watch them.  Two of my favorites are “Young Frankenstein” and “Blazing Saddles.”  Yes, they are silly and stupid, but they work for me.  My wife just shakes her head when I turn them on because she just doesn’t appreciate the medicinal value they provide me.
Babies and young children (especially grandkids) are another excellent source of joy and laughter (combined with a great amount of love).
Playing silly games with family and friends.  We just spent four hours with two other couples last night playing games like ‘Pass the Pig’, ‘Last Word’ and ‘BananaGrams’. We were laughing and smiling the entire evening.
What works for you?