I have received a few emails asking whether I have my wheelchair yet and how I am doing with my writing. Today's post will address those two topics plus a couple of others.

What Happened to Spring?

About two weeks ago, our temperatures were in the sixties and seventies. I immediately noticed how good I felt again. My left thumb and index finger once again functioned correctly. Leg strength was substantially better and I had far less aches and pain. I tend to forget how winter temperatures take its toll on me until something like this happens.

Unfortunately, this week we are having a difficult time rising above the forties. My legs, feet and fingers are constantly cold. Everything I mentioned above has reverted to wintertime normalcy (but, who is complaining). Fortunately, more signs of spring are popping up and blooming. In addition, many of the critters that I follow on or around our property have begun the mating ritual. Perhaps spring is just around the corner.

I am Writing Again

Back in February, I wrote about my desire to start writing again. Well, I have been doing a lot of editing of older stories in my "Writer's Corner" to help me get back in the groove. I have also started outlining three potential stories.

The outline I am the furthest along with will be my third "Jason Seaborne" story. It is a murder mystery with international implications. Jason confronts an old nemesis from his boozing days.
I have another outline about my teenage years initially titled, "Who Would Be out Walking on a Night like This?" It is a true story about a double date where the four of us ended up "parking" on a country road. When a nasty thunderstorm pops up, we see someone walking towards us fighting the drenching rain and high winds.
Another outline I have initially titled, "Living and Dying at the Sam's Club," will be a satirical look at what life is like for a certain Sam's Club Shopper.
Still Waiting for my Chair

Well, it has been more than four months since my seating evaluation at Emory and I still do not have my chair. I just learned that all of the forms have been signed and submitted to my insurance providers for approval. Once approval is received, ATG can place the order. This process has been a real test of my patience. In the past, I was spoiled by having a neighbor as a friend and medical equipment provider. When I was forced to change providers, I lost that relationship and the entire process has moved forward at a snail's pace.

The length of this process reminds me of the joke about a snail knocking on the front door of a house. When the man opens the door, he sees a snail. "What do you want," the man growls. The snail replies, "I am starving, do you have any extra food?" The man, irritated that a snail has taken him away from the football game on TV, yells, "No!" and kicks the snail off the steps and into the street. A month later, there is a knock on the same door. When the man opens the door, the snail asks, "What did you do that for?"

Sunday's Guest Post

This Sunday I have a guest post from Stan Highe. He wrote a story about "one of those changing moments" in a family relationship. As soon as I read it, I knew it was right for my "Living with Kennedy's Disease" blog. It brought to mind some experiences that I had with my grandchildren as the disease progressed.