In the September/October 2010 “AAA Going Places” magazine there was an excellent article by Sandy Klim called, “What happens if the unexpected occurs?”  I recommend that you take the time to read this article because it could make a difference when something does happen.  As the article mentions,“compiling (and copying) all of this information can seem daunting, but imagine the alternative.  Your family would have to piece together all this information (within days) without your in-depth knowledge.  The best bet is to gather this information (and update it annually), store it in a safe place, and continue to enjoy life.  It could be years or even decades before someone needs to access your emergency file, but in the event something does happen, you’ll have made the transition easier for the ones you love.”

As I read the article, I reviewed where my information was and found that everything was were I thought it was, but could someone else easily gain access to all the information when it was needed and I was not there.  I needed to become better organized and then let my wife and our executor know where the original documents are, contact information, etc. 

The basic documents that you should have in your “Emergency File” are:
Up to date health insurance policies
Advance directives can include:
A living will
Do not resuscitate (DNR) order
Durable power of attorney for health care
A current and valid copy of your wills
A copy of your organ donor card (if you intend to donate an organ)
Copies of the following documents:
Birth certificates
Marriage license
Divorce decrees
Social Security cards
Mortgages and deeds
Registration and titles for vehicles owned
Family and friends contact list
Clear wishes in regards to cremation, burial, religious ceremonies, and other memorial arrangements (headstones, markers, donations in lieu of flowers, etc.)
Copies of life insurance policies
Copies of 401(k) and IRA account information
A listing of financial and investment account information (other than those shown above)
Checking
Savings
CDs
Outstanding loans
Religious or spiritual affiliation and contact information (if desired).
The article mentions that this file can be stored in a fireproof safe at home, with your attorney, in a safe deposit box, or with a loved one (not living in your home).   I do have a concern of storing some of the information in a safe deposit box or with your attorney because emergencies do not always occur during banking hours.  If you have copies of the information with the original documents stored at one of these two locations, it would help.  The key is letting those close to you know where the files are at and who has permission to access the files.

Of course, those of us living with Kennedy's Disease might also want to include information on Kennedy's Disease, anesthesia information, tissue donation forms (should that be your wish) and a contact list for doctors.

Has the article forgotten anything else that needs to be included in this emergency file?