Yesterday's KDA chat room guest was Andrew Lieberman, MD, PhD, from the University of Michigan. He is a member of the Kennedy's Disease Association Scientific Review Board. He is also a strong supporter and an advocate of our association's work. Dr. Lieberman is one of my favorite guests because he has a way of explaining current research that everyone can understand. He also has a lot of energy and a great sense of humor that helps keep the chat room visitors involved.

An interesting bit of information we learned was that researchers test a mouse's strength with a paw pressure gauge. Dr. Lieberman was then asked how they actually do the test. He said that they have a grip strength meter that tests how long a mouse hangs on to a triangular metal bar before releasing it. Then, Dr. Lieberman commented that it either shows how much weaker a mouse is with Kennedy's Disease, or how much smarter they are than healthy mice. I loved that response. I would like to believe that the Kennedy's Disease mice are just smarter. They have probably read my "Smart Exercise Guide" and are adhering to the 70% rule.


Dr. Lieberman also mentioned that his lab was working with a chemical biologist to test the interaction of certain molecules with mutated cells. So far, they have tested over 60,000 molecules in an attempt to find one that interacts positively with cells. I cannot remember exactly, but I believe he said that the lab could test 384 different molecules at one time. If that number was correct, that works out to be 156 iterations (pretty amazing).


We also chatted a little about the Michigan State and University of Michigan studies on which came first, the chicken or the egg. No, not really, it is a study to determine if the muscle cells play as an important role as the motor neurons in mice with Kennedy's Disease. For many years, the focus has been on the motor neurons ... they degrade and die and that causes the muscles to waste away. In this theory, it appears that the muscles might begin to waste first or at a similar rate to the motor neurons. (Sorry, I do not believe I did this study justice with my explanation)

Dr. Lieberman also corrected an assumption I had about the results of the Dr. Subue (et al) clinical trials. According to Dr. Lieberman, the Japanese clinical trials show some positive results if the treatment began early in the progression cycle (within the first ten years of onset). This also corresponds with some of the testing of IGF-1 on mice models. If IGF-1 for muscles is administered pre-symptoms, it appears to be very effective. We "old codgers" just cannot catch a break!

The chat room transcript should be available on the KDA website around mid-week. If you get a chance, read the transcript (the section from 10:30 until 11:30 AM). There is some good stuff in there.