Ever since the progression of Kennedy's Disease began to require mobility aids or some type of assistive devices, I purchased only what was minimally needed to get by. My reasoning for this was twofold. 1) My ego would not allow me to consider purchasing anything more than I currently needed. 2) My frugalness (others might call it something else) could not justify buying anything that I did not currently need (anything more would be a waste of money). 

This philosophy set up a scenario where every two or three years it seemed like I always found myself needing something new.  An example of this process occurred with my first wheelchair. I knew that sometime down the line I would need a higher seat or a lift seat. Because the initial cost would have been about $1,000, I declined. A couple of years later I break my tibia and fibula and cannot place any weight on that leg for several months. If I had bought the lift seat system, life would have been substantially different during the recovery. In addition, because I installed in our van a rear entry interior lift ramp (Bruno Joey) for the chair only, I could not go anywhere during the recovery period because I could not transfer to the van's seat.

Last fall when I was looking at replacing my wheelchair, I reevaluated my thinking process and decided it was time for a change. Now, whenever I have a new need, I determine what I currently need as well as my possible needs within the next three-to-five years. This process helps me better compare products, options, and pricing. My last two purchases satisfy both my current needs as well as potential future needs for several years to come. The wheelchair, for example, has several options I currently do not need (nice to haves), but also are options that I will probably need in a few years. This brand also has several other options available (easily added at minimal cost) should I ever need them. The beauty of this new way of thinking is that I will not be scrambling trying to find something at the last minute that will satisfy a new need.

I am now looking at my proposed van purchase the same way. Why spend money on a vehicle and potentially not be able to drive it after a few years (without additional modifications) because of the progression of the disease or some unforeseen additional need?

This is new uncharted territory for me. We will see if this new way of thinking holds up over time, but right now I feel confident this is the right way to go.