I am certain some of you are tired of hearing about my exercise program. Yes, I am an advocate and feel it is my calling to get out the word ... EXERCISE IS GOOD. I have heard from several readers about their experiences with the "Smart Exercise Guide – Part II." It is always heartening to hear about the successes of the program. I am up to 1½ hours of exercise every Monday-Wednesday-Friday. I also have a short exercise routine of twenty minutes I do on the in-between days. I am using weights for every arm and shoulder exercise. I have increased my reps to a point where I could still do more, but now feel five to seven routines of 10-20 reps (depending upon the exercise) is enough. I no longer have any aches or pain associated with the program. I feel great after each long program (those good old endorphins pumping through the brain).

I also know that no matter how much I tout the benefits of exercise, many will never try it or give it a valid try. That is called "free will" and I respect that. Yet, I will never stop talking about the benefits of exercising smartly. Today, I am including updates from a person with Kennedy's Disease that began the Smart Exercise Program about six weeks ago. I really appreciate that Jim has taken on the program and is reporting on the personal benefits he is experiencing. Below are his updates from the KDA Forum.

In May, the following was posted. "I started using your new exercise program this past Monday. I am doing only the daily exercises right now and complete them in about 10 minutes (so you know the amount of reps I can do are very few).

My schedule for now is Monday & Tuesday, Wednesday break, Thursday & Friday, Weekend break.

Because I am just starting, I am still very weak, but the benefit for me right now is, "I am doing something!" So often, I feel like a helpless victim to SBMA. But with the exercise program, I have a sense of control and I love that feeling."

Then in mid-June, the following update was posted. "I have been using the exercise program for a month now. I am still only doing the daily exercises, but I have increased the number of reps by at least 50% and have double the reps of a couple of exercises. I have also increased my frequency to 5 days/week.

The most exciting thing for me? I can now take 2-3 trips down the hallway (doing the walking) without my cane and I can even stride out a little (not just heel, toe).

Also, the throat exercises have helped reduce choking when eating/drinking and strengthened my singing voice (I love to sing hymns at church on Sundays) though I am still not ready to try out for the choir.

I'm excited."

This week, the following update was posted. "I cannot tell you how excited I am about exercise. BKD (Before KD) I invested hundreds of dollars into exercise bikes, weight benches, etc. and would work out for a couple of months with little to no success. I mentioned a few days ago that I had increased the number of reps and frequency of the daily exercises.

Well, today, I added additional exercises from the smart guide and exercised for 45 minutes. I feel great! And so excited! Where I once dreaded exercise, I now look forward to it.

Thanks Bruce for all you do to help us."

One of the side-benefits of regular exercise is the mental and emotional lift that comes after a few weeks.
I am doing something to maintain my overall health.
I have the discipline to make exercise a regular routine.
I am getting stronger.
Look at me, I can now do ...
I feel great!
   
If any other reader is exercising, please let me know your experiences ... both good and bad. We can all learn from other's experiences.


 