Thirty years ago, when I was somewhat of a 'jock' and an up-and-coming executive, I thought I had the world in my hands and nothing could stop me. I made things happen. There was no lack of confidence and I felt I could accomplish almost anything. It was a wonderful life and all I could see down the road was an even better one.

Thirty years later, I am a more humble person. I have learned much over the years and continue to learn more about myself and about people, in general, every day. Where I was once a 'mover and a shaker', I am now blessed and thankful for the life that I have. Almost every day I rediscover the beauty of life through the help and support of many people … often strangers that I might never meet again.

Yes, my lovely wife is one of those people. When we first met and as our love grew, she never knew she would someday be living with a man with Kennedy's Disease. She has learned to live with me (living with the disease) and that is no easy matter. She has had to live with me through many tough times as Kennedy's Disease whittled away at my body, pride, ego, and spirit. She has become an excellent caregiver even when I fought against the notion that I needed one. For some reason she puts up with all my crap and supports me as I continue to learn to live with the disease.

What can I say about family and friends that is not mentioned in the above thoughts about my wife? They are flexible in their plans and continually find ways to involve me in activities that I would just not do if it were not for them. They are always there for me if I need them.

And, whether they are my grandchildren or just children in general, they are blessings from God who see the man (or grandpa) and not the handicap. They do not judge me on what I can or cannot do physically, they just want to laugh, play, learn, and be respected and loved. Children provide me with great joy because life is simple (uncomplicated) to them. They are the truest blessing in life because they expect nothing and give so much. With just a smile, they can warm my heart and make me feel young again.

Now, speaking of those strangers that I will never meet again, they are also little blessings in life. Several times through the years, someone stopped to pick me up when I fell down. It was not a problem for them, but it made all the difference in the world to me. Whether at a gas station in the middle of western Virginia at midnight, in an airport jet-way in Philadelphia during the rush hour, or outside a restaurant in Seattle at lunch; when I go down it is very difficult to get up without some help. Fortunately, these people came to my aid, brushed me off, made sure I was okay, and then walked on never to be seen again. 

Over thirty years I have learned a lot about life. Probably one of the most important lessons is that people are generally good and want to help. In addition, children do not know or care about the word 'handicapped'. And, most important, the love of family and friends knows no bounds if you are receptive and thankful for their support.

What more could anyone want in life?