Two new devices that could eventually help those of us that are physically handicapped will soon be available. Two of the devices that are revolutionary in concept use robotics to assist a person in their normal daily functions. The prototypes were designed for other uses, but eventually both of the units discussed below could be used for rehabilitation, the elderly, or those of us with a neuromuscular disease.

Honda Robo-Leg - http://corporate.honda.com/press/article.aspx?id=4987. Honda just updated their videos to show both of their products in action. Check it out: http://corporate.honda.com/innovation/walk-assist/ Information from the web site follows:

The robotic geeks at Honda have developed an exoskeleton that is worn like shoes to support the body and protect the joints; something the automaker says could reduce injuries on assembly lines but also might help the elderly get around more easily.  The device resembles a bicycle seat joined to a pair of shoes and fits suggestively between the legs to help the user walk, crouch and stand without excessive stress on the hips, knees and ankles. Honda is testing the "walking assist device" at a vehicle assembly line in Sayama, Japan, and says robo-legs could help anyone who spends a lot of time on their feet. More than that, it could help the elderly and infirm by making it easier to get around.
"This should be as easy to use as a bicycle," engineer Jun Ashihara said during a demonstration at Honda's headquarters in Tokyo. "It reduces stress, and you should feel less tired." And, it might be the only mobile technology that is geekier looking than a Segway.
Beyond serving as an ergonomic support for factory workers, Honda's third leg could have practical applications as potential replacement canes and walkers. Medical researchers have been working on walking-assistance technologies for decades.

HAL (Hybrid Assistance Limb) Exoskeleton -
http://www.cyberdyne.jp/englis...otsuithal/index.html This device can only be leased today, but there are rumors that it will be going on the market for $4,200 (US). Information from the web site follows:

"Robot Suit HAL" is a cyborg-type robot that can expand and improve physical capability.
When a person attempts to move, nerve signals are sent from the brain to the muscles via motor neurons, moving the musculoskeletal system. At this moment, very weak bio-signals can be detected on the surface of the skin. "HAL" catches these signals through a sensor attached on the skin of the wearer. Based on the signals obtained, the power unit is controlled to move the joint with the wearer's muscle movement, enabling to support the wearer's daily activities. This is what we call a 'voluntary control system' that provides movement interpreting the wearer's intention from the bio-signals in advance of the actual movement. Not only a 'voluntary control system', but also a 'robotic autonomous control system' that provides human-like movement based on a robotic system that integrally works together with the 'autonomous control system'. "HAL" is the world's first cyborg-type robot controlled by this unique Hybrid System.
"HAL" is expected to be applied in various fields such as rehabilitation support and physical training support in medical field, ADL … support for disabled people.

Both units have a battery life of about two hours, but that should improve over time. Having to stop every couple of hours to replace your battery would not be very convenient. The other concern I have is balance. Since we have balance issues (toe and ankle strength), would devices like this help? Yet, these type devices are exciting because it opens the door to other potential innovations.

Can you imagine the look you would get walking into a Wal-Mart wearing either one of these gadgets?