Throughout the years I have recommended the “Goodlife Zen” blog. Mary Jaksch does a wonderful job of reminding us of the important things in our life that we often take for granted. In her latest post, “Nature, Beauty, Gratitude” she has a wonderful ten minute video prepared by cinematographer Louis Schwartzberg and presented at TED (Ideas worth spreading) in San Francisco earlier this year.

The topic of the short video is gratitude; something we often overlook in our lives. All of us in this multi-tasking, non-stop world tend to overlook how wonderful life is around us.

Mr. Schwartzberg has a pet project where he has been taking time-lapse photography of flowers continually (24 hours a day) for over 30 years. He comments that 80% of the information we receive comes through our eyes. In this video he explains as we watch some of his time-lapse film of flowers blooming that “beauty and seduction is nature’s tool for survival because we protect and defend what we fall in love with.” That could not be said any better.

Another comment in the video has to do with weather. We often
complain about or are thankful for a particular day’s weather, but do we really take the time to observe these moments? The weather (cloud formations, sun, rain, fog, whatever) at that exact moment is unique and might never be experienced by us again. Yet, we do not take the time to watch the weather unfolding or changing. It is something we either put up with or enjoy, but we rarely take the time to watch it.

Mr. Schwartzberg goes on to briefly explain how light and colors are translated within our eyes and brain to form images. And, how these images then form ‘our world’ allowing us to see the beauty that surrounds us.   His message is one of constantly giving thanks for this wonderful world we live in.

Those of us living with Kennedy's Disease can occasionally forget about how wonderful our world is and how much we have to be thankful for.

So, don’t just watch the video. Afterward, take a moment and ‘smell the roses’.