The Americans with Disability Act (ADA) has been good for those of us with limited mobility. At times, I feel it does not go far enough and perhaps too far at other times, but it is definitely a step (pardon the pun) in the right direction. It provides access for the disabled to most stores and buildings (as well as many other places).

Unfortunately, when we are not in the city, many places are still not accessible. In most rural communities, there are shops and stores that are converted homes. I do not expect the owners of these older places to rebuild entrances or open up inside areas to accommodate a small minority of shoppers/visitors. Yet, there are times that I do miss out on interesting rural shops and museums because the home or building is 100-150 years old (I also enjoy the
interesting architecture).

Our family, friends, and neighbors homes are mostly not accessible to me or offer limited access. Most of these homes have entranceways with several steps and no handrails. A few are even split-level homes offering no access at all. We have a six-foot ramp and a threshold ramp that does provide me access to homes with only a few steps. One neighbor even went so far as to borrow an eight-foot ramp to make certain I could come to his Christmas party. I miss visiting or having dinner at these non-accessible homes. I also regret that sometimes people stress out trying to figure a way for me to attend their function.

Most visits and dinners these days have to take place at our house. This works most of the time, but places a burden on my wife (the host's role). Family holidays are also difficult to plan. Only three of the six family-member homes are accessible. Two of Cindy's sisters have bent over backwards to accommodate me (or they just know my wife will not leave me home alone for a holiday). One built a ramp from their garage into the house. Another finished out a room in the basement (with lower level access) in order for me to attend dinners and functions there. One home with access to the main level does not have any restrooms on that floor making for interesting all day events. We manage to get by, but logistics plays an important role in the planning process.

Again, I do not expect the world to change because I cannot access someone's home. I am hoping, however, that someday stairs will no longer be such a barrier to me. Wouldn't that be wonderful?