Can Kennedy's Disease Carriers experience symptoms? 
I am a carrier, why do I have severe cramping and difficulty swallowing. 

These type questiona are asked frequently. Researchers believe they know the answer, but since carriers are rarely studied, I am not sure we fully understand why some carriers experience far more severe symptoms and earlier onset. Below is a collection of articles on the subject. If anyone has other sources that might better explain the situation, please let me know.

X-linked dominant inheritance

In X-linked dominant inheritance, when the mother alone is the carrier of a mutated, or defective gene associated with a disease or disorder; she herself will have the disorder. Her children will inherit the disorder as follows:
Of her daughters and sons: 50% will have the disorder, 50% will be completely unaffected. Children of either sex have an even chance of receiving either of their mother's two X chromosomes, one of which contains the defective gene in question.

When the father alone is the carrier of a defective gene associated with a disease or disorder, he too will have the disorder. His children will inherit the disorder as follows:
Of his daughters: 100% will have the disorder, since all of his daughters will receive one copy of his single X chromosome.
Of his sons: none will have the disorder; sons do not receive an X chromosome from their father.
If both parents were carriers of a defective gene associated with a disease or disorder, they would both have the disorder. Their children would inherit the disorder as follows:
Of their daughters: 100% will have the disorder, since all of the daughters will receive a copy of their father's X chromosome.
Of the sons: 50% will have the disorder, 50% will be completely unaffected. Sons have an equal chance of receiving either of their mother's X chromosomes.
In such a case, where both parents carry and thus are affected by an X-linked dominant disorder, the chance of a daughter receiving two copies of the X chromosome with the defective gene is 50%, since daughters receive one copy of the X chromosome from both parents. Were this to occur with an X-linked dominant disorder, that daughter would likely experience a more severe form.
Read the entire article at: Wikipedia    

So, what does happen when a woman has two defective 'X' chomosomes?

Ed Meyertholen provided an explanation in a KDA Forum. Click Here to read more
This is an abstract of the study Ed mentioned. Click Here for that  
There is another interesting explanation about why symptoms might be more pronounced in some women.  X-inactivation
Read the entire article at: X-inactivation at Wikipedia    