As I mentioned earlier, my new wheelchair is too tall to fit in the back of my current minivan. Since I was already looking at replacing our van, I have been doing some research. One thing I learned right away is that there are dozens of considerations and options. In today's article, I will list the considerations and options that I am aware of so far. Understanding what my needs are (or will be) will help my mobility dealer(s) make recommendations and help me end up with the right vehicle.

Considerations:

How much can I afford or am willing to pay?
Will I finance the van or pay cash?
Will the dealer accept a trade-in?
How many people will you be transporting (4, 5, 7, or more)?
How much interior height room do I need (in the back, middle, or front driver/passenger area)?
Will I transfer from the chair to the driver or passenger seat?
Is there an emergency exit in case of an emergency (i.e., loss of power)?
How much driving do you plan on (annual mileage estimate will help decide whether a new or used van is needed)?
Will you need the van for anything special requiring more ground clearance or storage capacity?
Will you be driving or do you want to sit in the front (or are you comfortable sitting in the back or middle)?
Can you transfer to a regular car seat or do you have to remain in the wheelchair?
Will both you and your significant other be driving?
Do you feel comfortable ordering a van from a company out of the area without seeing or driving it?
Do the exterior color and style matter?
Would you accept any make and model, or do you have a preference?
Will the van be the primary family vehicle or a second car?
Financial Consideration: Do you want a new van or will a used one work?
Are there any rebates available?
Length of Ownership Consideration: How long do you plan to keep the van and what will your progression be during that period?
How much entry height do I need (door clearance)?
How much interior height do I need (52 to 56+ inches)?
Would I prefer a minivan or a full size van (driving preference)?
Do you want mechanical or are manual (straps) tie downs acceptable?
Do you need hand controls for braking and acceleration?
Is the price negotiable?

Van Options:

Full size or minivan
Ramp Vans
Rear entry
Side entry with ramp in floor, under floor, or fold down

Lift Vans
Rear lift with exterior storage
Rear lift with interior storage
Side lift with interior storage
Rear Hoist with interior storage
Lowered floor (10, 12, 13+ inches)
Higher door entrance (52 to 56+ inches)
Driver or passenger transfer seats (interior or exterior transfer)
Removable passenger or driver seat
Mechanical (i.e., EZ-Lock) tie down or manual (straps)
One company I contacted requires that if you plan to drive from a wheelchair that you need to go through a driver evaluation and assessment program at your own expense (offered through the same company). The company has a liability concern and wants to know your capabilities to drive and what options you will need to drive (i.e., hand controls). This is a business requirement and not a state or federal requirement. This means Medicare does not cover the expense.

As I learn more, I will be adding to my list of considerations and options. Considering this is a major investment (depending upon options, it could add another $24,000+ to the price of the vehicle), I need to do my homework ahead of time.

Can you think of anything else that needs to be added to this list?