Occasionally I find something interesting enough that I need to share it even though it is off-subject.  Mary Jaksch’s blog, “Goodlife Zen” is a wonderful blog that I have recommended several times.  She is excellent in taking on difficult subjects and explaining them quite well.



Her recent blog, “How Motivation Works,” caught my eye and I was not disappointed.  There are two videos from Daniel Pink explaining how motivation works and what does not appear to work.  The first video is well done because it is animated.  Mr. Pink covers a lot of ground in ten minutes, but you are left with a much clearer understanding of how people are motivated.  The second is an interview with Mr. Pink who further explains his thoughts and the research on the subject.  If you can only watch one video, watch the first one because you will be educated and entertained.



The first video brought out some interesting discoveries on this subject of motivation.  In some ways, it is counter-intuitive and definitely goes against mainstream thinking.  However, it also makes a lot of sense … especially when I recalled my work history and performance.

It was interesting to note that rewards (extrinsic motivation) do not play as important roll in motivating people as we would generally think.  Once people are comfortable with their current compensation, bonuses are less likely to product superior performance.  It then becomes important for management to find the personal motivators … what makes people want to accomplish more and excel at their chosen work.



Mr. Pink explains that there are three main “internal” drivers (intrinsic motivation) that motivate us:
Autonomy – self direction, being able to choose your own path
Mastery – being able to see progress … improvement in what you are doing
Purpose – doing something that really matters … it can make a difference
Please take a moment and at least watch the first video.  You will not be disappointed.  After viewing it, ask yourself, "what motivates you today?"  What keeps you going?  What makes you push harder or walk further knowing that you might fall down?