Social Security – Disability (SS-D) is important to many of us who have to retire early because of health related issues (i.e., Kennedy's Disease). A few years ago, I wrote a 'guide' for applying for SS-D based upon my experience. Since the guide is twenty pages long, in this post I will try to focus on a few key 'learnings' that might make the process easier for you if you ever need to apply. At the end of Part II, I will provide a link to the actual PDF guide.


First, it is important that you understand how Social Security defines 'disability'. That is because other programs have different definitions for disability. Some programs pay for partial disability or for short-term disability. Social Security does not. Disability under Social Security is based on your inability to work. You will be considered disabled if you cannot do work you did before and they decide that you cannot adjust to other work because of your medical condition(s). Your disability also must last or be expected to last for at least a year or will result in death. [Note: Progressive disorders are different and this is why you need to work with your doctor and your Social Security representative in order to explain the gradual and continual loss of certain functions]


Here is how to make the process work for you:

A doctor who reviewed disability claims for a Fortune 100 company gave me the following advice on the disability application process.

Apply immediately – do not wait until you are totally disabled before beginning the process.
Be patient. The process takes time. It is not uncommon to wait 90-120 days before hearing the results of the application.
Take the time to fill out the forms completely. The disability process is no different from any other application process (e.g., home loan, employment, etc.). Leave little to interpretation.
Remove your emotions from the application process. Think of it as a business deal – your business. Learn the rules of the game and make the rules work for you. The 'red-tape' and follow-up letters asking for additional information are all part of the game.
Understand how the forms are written. The disability process is written for people with a sudden illness or disability – not for people with progressive illnesses where there is no treatment or cure.
Understand the process. Remember that the Social Security Administration is a government agency. Many applications are denied the first time.

I will add three more comments based upon my experiences with the Social Security Administration.

Document everything. The more information you can provide up front, the smoother the process will go.
Take the time to educate the reviewer. Do not expect the reviewer to understand Kennedy's Disease or your specific situation. The reviewer can be an excellent advocate if she understands Kennedy's Disease and your disability.
Be prepared. The more prepared and organized you are, the better the chance for approval. (My award was approved in six weeks)

In my next post, I will discuss:

How to be better prepared
How long the process should take
Other tips to help speed up the process