For most of my working career, I spent a lot of time traveling (mostly sitting in airports).  Since 9/11, however, air travel has taken on a totally new meaning.  If you have to travel today, you had better be prepared for long lines, many delays and more thorough security checks.  If you require a wheelchair for mobility, the process becomes even more difficult.  There are resources available today that can help this process.  Below are just a few that might be of help as you prepare for, as well as, during the trip.

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security now has a card that will make passing through airport security a little easier for people traveling with disabilities.  The card, according to Homeland Security, will help both the person traveling and security personnel.  It does not exempt the person traveling from inspection; it just makes the entire process smoother and more private.  Quest Magazine had an article on this handy card and a copy of the card can be printed (PDF) by clicking on this link.  The article states, “The government agency says the optional cards serve the dual purpose of protecting passenger privacy and facilitating the screening process. Although the card doesn’t allow the user to skip the screening, it states that “alternative procedures which provide an equivalent level of security screening are available and can be done in private.”  

The KDA has put together some travel tips that also might come in handy.  The section on traveling with a wheelchair comes from the personal experiences of a board member.  Included in the article is the role of the Complaint Resolution Officer.  “In the event of a problem with airport or in-flight personnel, you should require them to contact the Complaints Resolution Officer (CRO), who must always be available and willing to deal with your grievance. They cannot refuse. However, to avoid problems, make sure that you let the airline know your needs as early as possible.“ 

The Transportation Security Administration has provided some good information on preparing to go through security checks (screening process).  The MDA also has an article “The Keys to Success” for air travel. I hope some of these suggestions will help fellow KD’rs prepare for their trip to the upcoming Kennedy’s Disease Association conference in San Diego this November.

Readers, if you have some additional tips or information on easing the travel process, please add a comment or send me an email.