I just read a post in Goodlife Zen that needs to be shared along with a few personal comments. First, I’ll share a portion of the post and then add my thoughts. You can read the entire article by following the link below.

6Unexpected Ways Exercise Improves Your Mental health

Jack LaLanne, nicknamed the Godfather of modern fitness, exercised until the day before he died at 96. He once said, “Exercise is the catalyst. That’s what makes everything happen: your digestion, your elimination, your sex life, your skin, hair, everything about you depends on circulation.”

… exercise improves their heart rate, pumps more blood to the brain, builds muscles, and of course makes them go from fat to fit naturally.

However, scientists believe that the benefits of exercising don’t just end there. They claim that regular physical exercise can help boost your mental health by boosting your brain function. …

1. Reduces stress
… By improving blood circulation to the brain, exercise boosts the production of norepinephrine, a chemical that regulates stress and improves concentration. So, the next time you’re mentally exhausted or stressed out, just get off your seat and do any form of exercise for a few good minutes. You’ll experience the mental benefits almost instantly.

2. Boosts the production of ‘happy’ chemicals
… Exercise releases endorphins that control feelings like happiness and excitement. … The effects of exercise on your mood can be even more profound than any antidepressant pill or medication.  You don’t have to be a gym rat to reap the benefits of exercise; all you need to do is just sneak in 30 minutes of workout time in your daily routine.

3. Improves confidence and self-esteem
… Having a well-toned body makes you feel good and look good at the same time. The better you look, the more your confidence and self-esteem will be. …

4. Outdoor exercises for Vitamin D
To enhance the experience, take your workout outdoors. No matter how stressed out you’re, spending time in the nature can help relieve stress, and when that’s coupled with exercise, you get superior results. …

What’s more, by soaking up in the sun, your body gets a healthy dose of vitamin D, which is otherwise hard to get via food and packaged supplements. …

5. Boosts brainpower
Laboratory studies conducted on rats and men have proved that cardiovascular exercises help generate new brain cells and eventually result in a healthier brain. It has also been found that exercise fosters brain-specific protein called BDNF which is linked to the decision making, thinking, and learning skills of an individual.

6. Helps control addiction
The brain reacts to any form of pleasure-sensitive stuff like exercise, … … but also help in the recovery and improvement of the person’s physical and mental well-being.


When this article started out with Jack LaLanne, boy did that stimulate memories of my childhood. He was on television every day wearing that body suit.

First off, I do not plan on letting Kennedy’s Disease get the better of me without a fight. And, how I fight back is with decent nutrition, daily exercise, and listening to my body.

I still exercise every day, several times a day. I find it good for what ails me. If I eat too much wheat products and my joints are painful, exercise loosens things up and removes the pain. If my hands aren’t doing what they are supposed to, exercise makes them more flexible and stronger. If I’m having trouble lifting object over my head, exercise provides just what is needed to get the job done.

Below are just a few of the links I posted regarding exercise for those of us living with a progressive neuromuscular condition like Kennedy’s Disease. Do a search (on the right next to my photo) to see all the posts on exercising.
NewExercise Program – Part I
NewExercise Program – Part II
ExercisesCan Improve Your Quality of Life – Part I
            Part II in this series
            Part III in this series
            PartIV in this series
            PartV in this series
PartVI in this series
Exercisingwith light weights is good for you
Let’sDo Some Exercises



Remember my mantra:  Exercise Good – Couch Potato Bad