Profiles of Young Researchers

In an earlier post called, “The Nine Stages,” I mentioned “Hope” was the ninth stage. I ended the post by saying, “With acceptance, and armed with the additional knowledge that researchers were working diligently towards finding a treatment and potentially a cure, I discovered something that had been missing recently in my life – Hope." In another post, “Another Ray of Hope on the Research Front,” I commented, “how fortunate we are that another generation has picked up the baton and continues to move towards the finish line (finding a treatment or cure). As long as someone is carrying the baton, we have hope.”

In this post, I wish to recognize another researcher who is carrying the baton:

Elena Bolzoni, Post Grad Student, is a researcher at the Università degli Studi di Milano in Milano, Italy

Bruce: Why did you decide to focus your research on Kennedy's Disease?

Elena: I heard about Kennedy's Disease for the first time during my master at the Centre of Excellence on Neurodegenerative Diseases. My mentor introduced me to Kennedy’s Disease. Then I started studying it and I became more and more interested in the subject, most of all because it is a rare disease and it is sometimes not well known among the scientists (at least not as much as other neurodegenerative diseases). That is why, when I had the choice, I decided to focus on Kennedy’s Disease.

Bruce: Do you personally know anyone with Kennedy's Disease?

Elena: I met patients at some meetings (including the KDA annual meeting), and one of my best friend's dad has Kennedy’s Disease. Meeting the patients and personally knowing the patients' relatives is useful to really understand (and never forget) what is our final goal out of the laboratory.

Bruce: Briefly summarize what you are currently working on and why you feel it is important in KD research.

Elena: I am characterizing molecules that have beneficial effects on cell models of SBMA (Kennedy’s Disease). I am testing compounds already used in therapy for other degenerative diseases. This would facilitate future clinical trials, if they result promising in experimental models. (Note: Elena has simplified her research comments at my request. Her research grant proposal is way beyond my level of understanding)

Bruce: What are your aspirations (career goals)?

Elena: I must finish my PhD program, and then I would like to continue my career in science.