In an earlier post titled, "Not Every Health Issue is Related to Kennedy's Disease," I mentioned, "Those of us living with Kennedy's Disease have to always be careful that we do not associate (blame) every unusual symptom or health issue on the disease. If it is not listed in the common symptoms for Kennedy's Disease, make certain you check with your GP and neurologist. Just because we have Kennedy's Disease does not mean we are immune to all other health disorders."

Well, it appears that not just the patient, but doctors, when stumped, can also associate almost any health issue with Kennedy's Disease. This week I received an email from a spouse whose husband has Kennedy's Disease. The man was in the hospital being treated for pneumonia. The doctors had him on a feeding tube and he came down with a terrible case of diarrhea that could not be corrected. The doctors ran all kinds of tests, but could not find anything wrong (what was causing the diarrhea). In the end, they felt that Kennedy's Disease must cause the diarrhea. The spouse did not go along with the diagnosis, so she contacted the Kennedy's Disease Association to confirm the doctor's assumption that diarrhea was associated with Kennedy's Disease.

Do not just automatically agree with your doctor if something does not sound right. Do a little "leg-work" on the Internet and even contact a known expert in the field (e.g., someone that knows Kennedy's Disease) before accepting the diagnosis. If the diagnosis still does not sound right, ask for a second, or even a third, opinion. Doctors make mistakes. Doctors are like most of us when confronted with an unknown; they look for the answer based upon known facts including medical history. I am not saying that is bad, I just believe they can be wrong like anyone else.

I remember when I was a teenager; my parents accepted anything our doctor diagnosed or recommended. Today, I understand that a consultation is just that. It is a meeting of the minds. It does not necessarily mean the diagnosis is correct, it is just the best guess based upon the information and test results that are available.



I believe it is important that we become caretakers of our own health. We need to keep detailed records of doctor's visits, test results, medical history, etc. We also need to understand that we have an opinion and a voice in any diagnosis and treatment recommended. Yes, the doctor is the professional, but it is our body and health. When there is any doubt, just say "time out." And, do not be afraid to ask for a second opinion.