As Kennedy's Disease progresses, those of us with the mutated gene occasionally find ourselves looking up at the sky (or ceiling). I have found myself in that position far too many times. In my younger years, I just stood back up and dusted myself off. In my middle years, it took a little longer to stand up and occasionally it was nice to have someone or something nearby to help steady myself afterward. If I go down today, I need someone to lift me up to a mostly vertical position where I can get my legs underneath me and the knees locked. This takes a lot more strength on the part of the lifter.

There are also times I find myself in a lower chair and I just cannot stand up. That is because my buttock needs to be about 30-to-45 degrees higher than my knees before the quads can finish the lifting of the body. If I lean too far forward trying to raise my buttock and have nothing in front of me to brace myself on, I could lose my balance and fall forward.

Leverage is the key to any successful standing-up process. Without anything nearby to use as an assist, another person can help you safely reach the standing position. I learned a lot about this subject when I broke my fibula and tibia three years ago. Not being able to put any weight on my left leg for several months made every transfer a joint operation.

If you are in need of regular help in standing or transferring, gait-belts or transfer-belts are useful and relatively inexpensive. These belts help the caregiver gain a firm grip to help you stand up. They also reduce the strain on the caregiver's back if used properly. Gate-belts are also very useful when walking around the house. A caregiver can place one hand on the back of the belt and another under your upper arm to help you safely walk.

For me, a person can use my belt ... lifting from the back of my pants. This provides just enough support to make the difference. Any good quality leather belt (the wider the better) is easy for the caregiver to grasp and hold onto. If I am not wearing a belt, then grasping the back of my pants and lifting works well (except it gives a wedgey).

Some people that I have asked to help me stand up believe I need a strong, quick lift or pull. This usually sends me flying forward. The key for the caregiver is to let the person use his own leg strength to do most of the lifting. The caregiver is there to support and provide a slight boost in the beginning. Once up, we might still need a little support until we can get our legs underneath us and locked. My wife has this technique down. Others, however, are less comfortable with the process and usually overcompensate.

Now, if I am on the floor (or ground) after a fall, I find that I need a minute or two to get myself oriented (think through the process of how to stand up). The key is to get my feet underneath me and set before asking for help. When I am ready, it is best to have someone stand behind me and wrap his arms under my arms with his hands locked across my chest. I liken it to picking up a large sack of potatoes. Using their legs to lift, the person needs to get me to a position where I can lock my knees and regain my balance before letting go. The belt lift does not work well in this situation because your back and abdominal strength does not allow you to straighten up. The one exception is if the belt is high on your chest (under your arms).

Important: Never release the person until they have given you a verbal signal that it is okay. Releasing them too soon could result in another fall.

For more information, follow this link: How to use a gait belt .