Sometime back, I wrote about the robotic devices that could someday make it possible for us to walk and take stairs safely as Kennedy's Disease progresses. Well, yesterday I was watching Good Morning America on ABC and they had a clip on a fourteen person clinical trial that is being carried out at thee Moss Rehabilitation Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The trial is to see if something called the ReWalk (bionic legs) manufactured in Israel by ArgoMedtec can allow paraplegics with serious spinal cord injuries to stand up, walk, and even take stairs. You have to be able to use your arms to make the device work. The company hopes to have FDA approval by the end of this year.

Go to ABC News – GMA, click on the Thursday tab and in the second row is a video for Bionic Breakthrough. For a longer video that shows more of the capabilities of the ReWalk, go to Med-Gaget. An excerpt from the article follows:

ReWalk comprises a light wearable brace support suit which integrates DC motors at the joint, rechargeable batteries, an array of sensors and a computer-based control system. It fits the body snugly to detect upper body movements, which are used to initiate and maintain the walking process. Wearers also use crutches for stability and safety.

ReWalk is undergoing clinical trials in Israel at the Rehabilitation Hospital at Chaim Sheba Medical Center - Tel Hashomer, with pilots planned for rehab centers in Holland and Italy. A US trial is scheduled to begin in November at the Moss Rehabilitation Center in Philadelphia, after which Argo will apply for FDA regulatory approval.

Argo's demo video features team member Radi Kioff, a 40-year-old Druze Israeli citizen who was shot in the back while serving in the Israel Defense Forces during the first Lebanon War. Ironically, the man who devised the system that allows Kioff to walk cannot benefit from his own invention. A quadriplegic, Amit Goffer has only partial use of his hands, but not enough to operate the ReWalk.

The manufacturer, ArgoMedtec, also has a webpage that discusses the ReWalk Robotic Suit. An excerpt from this page follows:

ReWalk™ works with users – not just for them. Users walk with the assistance of crutches, controlling suit movement through subtle changes in center of gravity and upper-body movements. In addition to simplifying suit control, this user participation in mobility brings tangible health and emotional benefits. ReWalk™ is not just a vertical wheelchair – ReWalk™ restores the element of control over mobility so lacking for wheelchair users.

As any sedentary wheelchair user can attest, life in a wheelchair carries a hefty healthcare price tag. Serious problems with the urinary, respiratory, cardiovascular and digestive systems are common, as well as osteoporosis, pressure sores and other afflictions.

Functionality:
All day usage
Mobility – walking, sit-to-stand, stand-to-sit, climb stairs, ascending/descending slopes, driving
Training – replacing other training equipment at home and at rehabilitation center
Prerequisites:
Ability to use hand and shoulders (walking with crutches)
Healthy cardiovascular system and bone density

I am not saying that this will work for any of us living with Kennedy's Disease, but it sure seems like it might be something that could help us remain ambulatory longer.


 
Please feel free to comment. By taking a moment to share your thoughts you add much to these articles. The articles then become more than just something I said or believe. In addition, by adding a comment, you might just be helping the next reader by sharing your opinion, experience, or a helpful tip. You can comment by clicking on "comments" below or by sending me an email. I look forward to hearing from you.