This is Part V of this series of exercises to improve the quality of your life as Kennedy’s Disease progresses causing lifestyle changes. Consider adding at least two-or-three of these exercises and practice them daily. As always, consult with your doctor before beginning any exercise program.
 
Neck, Shoulder and Back Muscles
I wrote about ‘dropping head syndrome’ in August, but felt I need to include exercises for this important muscle group here. Neck braces, in my opinion, should be a last resort because they only support the head and do nothing to improve the muscles. That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t wear a brace if your doctor recommends one. What I am saying is that you should exercise the neck, shoulders and back muscles to help maintain their health and your quality of life.
Touch your Chest:  Works the neck and shoulder muscles. While sitting, place your palm against your forehead. Slowly lower your chin down to touch your chest, while having your palm apply resistance (holding your head up). Perform 10-12 reps (or whatever is comfortable).
Pull the Head Up:  Works the neck and shoulder muscles. While sitting, clasp your hands behind your head and slowly lower your chin down to touch your chest.  Raise your head up to the normal upright position, while having your hands apply resistance (holding your head down).  Perform 10-12 reps (or whatever is comfortable).
Side Turns:  Works the neck and shoulder muscles.   While sitting, place your left palm against your cheek and temple. Slowly rotate your chin 90 degrees to the left while having your palm apply resistance (keeping your head from turning). Perform 10-12 reps (or whatever is comfortable). Switch to the right hand and perform the same exercise rotating to the right.
Bend to the Shoulder:  Works the neck and shoulder muscles.  While sitting, place your left palm against your temple. Slowly lower your head towards your left shoulder (go about half way or 45 degrees) while your left hand applies resistance (to hold the head upright). Perform 10-12 reps (or whatever is comfortable). Switch to the right hand and perform the same exercise by slowly lowering your head to the right.
Bend to the waist:  Works the back and neck muscles.  While sitting and with your hands at your side, slowly lower your chest to your knees while curling your chin into your chest.  As you slowly raise yourself back up to a vertical position, curl your neck up until you are looking at the ceiling (or sky).  Perform 10-12 reps (or whatever is comfortable).
Shoulder Curls: Slowly raise and roll your shoulders to the front, to the top, to the back and back down to the starting position. Perform 18 rolls. Reverse the direction and perform another 18 slow rolls.
Bend Down and Up: Place your hands on your hips. As you exhale, slowly bend to the left side as far down as comfortable. Straighten up and slowly bend to the right side. Straighten up and slowly bend down to the knees. As you slowly straighten up, bend you neck back and look to the ceiling. Perform 9-to-18 of these reps.