It would be interesting to take a survey of all of us with Kennedy's Disease to determine what percentage were misdiagnosed initially. I realize that Kennedy's Disease is a rare disorder and that most family doctors have not ever heard of it. However, there are still a number of neurologists that have never treated a patient with Kennedy's Disease.

The problem I have with this scenario is that far too often in this modern world of medicine we are still being misdiagnosed. The DNA blood test is a simple, relatively fast, and a low cost way to determine if a patient has Kennedy's Disease. Yet, a least a couple of times a month I receive an email from a family member (most often the spouse) explaining the symptoms and wondering if it could be Kennedy's Disease. Because the internet can be an excellent resource to help educate us on symptoms and potential health concerns, most often the person stumbles across Kennedy's Disease and the Kennedy's Disease Association in those searches. Even more impressive is that people are more likely to share the information they discovered with their doctors. Thank God that the days of simply letting the diagnosis and treatment be a one-way conversation are mostly gone.

Yes, I realize a diagnosis is often a best guess based upon visible or quantifiable symptoms. It is not an exact science. On the other hand, doctors have many tests today (as compared to just ten or twenty years ago) to help diagnose a condition or disease. My concern is for family when a misdiagnosis is initially given. Most often the misdiagnosis is ALS. I cannot even recount the number of times someone has shared his or her family's story after being misdiagnosed. The initial thoughts and emotions are difficult to grasp as they try to rationalize why this is happening to them and what it means to the family. Some families have made life-changing decisions after the initial misdiagnosis.

This, to me, is the hidden cost of a misdiagnosis. The emotional impact on the entire family is often overwhelming. Fortunately, we were born fairly resilient. Most of us seem to find a way to pick up the pieces and move on. This is the beauty of the human spirit. And, if there is any blessing in being diagnosed with Kennedy's Disease, it is that the disease progresses slowly. We have time … to plan, to adjust, and to live. I am not saying it will be easy, but at least we have some time.

Were you initially misdiagnosed? If so, what was the initial diagnosis? What were those first days like for you and your family?