Public Restrooms – "Can't live without them and can't live with them."

Last Saturday's KDA chat room was interesting. We somehow got on the subject of public restrooms and from there everything went downhill.

It seems that there are never enough handicap accessible stalls.
After someone using a handicap parking stall that does not need it, the next event that raises our stress level is finding someone using a handicap accessible stall that does not need it.
Stalls that have a very low commode height and low grab bars are almost worthless for us older men.
When the ADA developed criteria for handicap accessible stalls, they did not take into consideration people where their arm and leg strength does not allow them to stand up from the seated position. We need higher commodes and higher grab bars.
Urinals that do not allow us to lean against the wall, or a partition, for balance are difficult to use.
Some older buildings that converted original restrooms to handicap have entrance door widths that do not allow wheelchair access.
Almost everyone at one time or another has had to try more than one facility's restroom to find a more easily accessible stall.
Many of the chat room attendees related stories where they needed assistance in standing up from a commode. A few commented that they had to ask strangers for help. They felt uncomfortable asking, but did not have any other options. I mentioned that I carry a "tall-ette" with me in the car. The formed plastic insert adds four inches to the height of the commode. I do not go anywhere without it.

Most everyone feels that visiting places that do not have adequate restroom facilities is a constant source of concern and limits our activities. The subject is easily broached with your caregiver and family, but not something that you would feel comfortable discussing with friends and acquaintances. I know that it is always a consideration whenever my wife and I consider an upcoming activity or trip. You hate to be a "stick in the mud," but when you have to go, you have to go!

I would be interested if you have any tips or tricks to help minimize this concern.