The story below has been around for at least ten years. I liked it because of it's simplicity of message. In the original version, this next sentence follows the story. Since this is my blog, I believe it should proceed it.

Too often we underestimate the power of a touch, a smile, a kind word, a listening ear, an honest compliment, or the smallest act of caring, all of which have the potential to turn a life around.

When I was young and full of p___ and vinegar, so many things went by unnoticed, or noticed and then forgotten. At some point in my life, I started to appreciate these little moments. And, fortunately for me, memories of many of those moments from my childhood and early adult years poured in. With the progression of Kennedy's Disease, the opportunity to notice these moments has increased substantially. Whether from a caregiver, a friend, or a stranger you pass on the street, the power of a smile, a hug, a kind word, etc. can change your world.

Even though you might have read this story before, I ask that you take a moment and read it again. It always brings a smile to my face and a warmth in my heart. Enjoy.


Lunch with God

A little boy wanted to meet God. He knew it might be a long trip to where God lived, so he packed his backpack with a bag of potato chips and a six-pack of root beer.

When he had gone about three blocks, he saw an old woman. She was sitting in the park, just staring at some pigeons. The boy sat down next to her and opened his backpack. He was about to take a drink from his root beer when he noticed that the old lady looked hungry, so he offered her some chips. She gratefully accepted them and smiled at him.

Her smile was so pretty that the boy wanted to see it again, so he offered her a root beer. Again, she smiled at him. The boy was delighted. They sat there all afternoon eating and smiling, but they never said a word.

As twilight approached, the boy realized it was time to go home. He got up to leave; but before he had gone more than a few steps, he turned around, ran back to the old woman, and gave her a hug. She gave him her biggest smile yet.

When the boy arrived home, his mother was surprised by the smile on her son's face. She asked him, "What did you do today?"

He replied, "I had lunch with God. You know what? She's got the most beautiful smile I've ever seen."

Meanwhile, the old woman returned to her home. Her son was stunned by the look of peace on her face. He asked, "Mother, what did you do today?"

She replied, "I ate potato chips in the park with God. You know, he's much younger than I expected."


Photo: 112629662430.jpg by wunee