I read an interesting article this week in the CostCo Connection.  The title was, “Wait Training – Exercising slowly can bring quicker benefits”. 

BACKGROUND

The article, written by Star Lawrence, discussed a study and a book by Ken Hutchins.  The study involved the University of Florida, Nautilus, and Mr. Hutchins.  They teamed up to see how frail older women could use professional gym equipment to build bone and increase strength.  They found that women who performed the exercises slowly reached their goals and without injury.


A Massachusetts study twenty years later (2001) involved two groups.  The control group did 10 repetitions of each exercise where each rep involved 2 seconds in each direction (up and down).  The other group did 5 reps where it took 10 second going up and 4 seconds coming down.  In other words 14 second for one rep versus 4 seconds.

The results were so surprising that the researchers had to recheck them.  The group performing the slow exercise reps attained 50% greater strength than the standard (control) group.

CONCEPT

It may be a simple change, but it is not easy.  The principle is to raise and lower weights (or arms and legs) to a slow count … Hutchins prefers 10 second up and 10 down until the muscles are fatigued.  It eliminates the use of momentum.



Use the amount of weight you are most comfortable with (or no weights initially).  The idea, once again, is to slow the rate going up and down to force the muscles to work harder.  When asked if there is anyone that should not try this, Hutchins said he cannot think of anyone who would not benefit.  He has even taught people in nursing homes and everyone benefited.

MY EXPERIMENT WITH SUPERSLOW

I tried this routine on Friday’s long workout and it was much more difficult and I could feel the difference by the end of each series of reps.  Since there is no jerking, it also helps prevent injury.

I remember my physical therapist reminding me to slow down.  He wanted gravity to play as much a role in the exercises as the weights.  I will continue to try this slower routine and let you now how it works for me.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

If interested, there are a couple of good online articles that further explain the routine and potential benefits:
http://www.unm.edu/~lkravitz/Article%20folder/superslow.html
http://www.ultimate-exercise.com/pb3.html