This is Part VI of the series of exercises to improve the quality of your life as Kennedy’s Disease progresses causing lifestyle changes. Consider adding at least two-or-three of these exercises and practice them daily. As always, consult with your doctor before beginning any exercise program.
 
Feet and Leg Muscles
Because I sit a lot more these days, the potential of a blood clot increases. Two things can help minimize the potential of developing a clot.

First, MOVE every two hours. Sitting for longer than two hours increases your chances for a clot.

Second, EXERCISE these muscles every 30-to-60 minutes and especially if you have to sit for longer than two hours for some reason.
Knee Lifts: Works the quads and hip flexors. This exercise further strengthens the leg muscles. Sit in a chair. Lift the left knee as high a comfortable and hold for a count of five. Relax the left leg. Lift the right knee as high as comfortable and hold for a count of five. Relax the right leg. Perform 10-12 lifts with each leg (or whatever is comfortable).
Straighten the Leg: Works the quads. This exercise further strengthens the leg muscles. Sit in a chair. Straighten and lift the left leg out in front of you as high as comfortable. Hold for a count of five. Relax the left leg. Straighten and lift the right leg out in front of you and hold for a count of five. Relax the right leg. Perform 10-12 lifts with each leg (or whatever is comfortable).
Heel Raises: Works the calves, ankles, and feet muscles. This exercise further strengthens the lower leg muscles and develops greater flexibility and confidence. Sit with your feet directly below your knees (at a 90 degree angle to your thighs). Raise your heels as high as possible while keeping your toes on the floor. Hold the position for a count of two and then return your heel to the floor. Perform 15-20 heel lifts (or whatever is comfortable).
Toe Raises: Works the ankles, and feet muscles. This exercise further strengthens the lower leg muscles and develops greater flexibility and confidence. Sit with your feet as far out in front of you as possible while still keeping the feet flat on the floor. Raise your toes as high as possible while keeping your heels on the floor. Hold the position for a count of two and then return your toes to the floor. Perform 15-20 heel lifts (or whatever is comfortable).
Curl the Toes: Place a dime or penny on the floor in front of you. Pick up the coin with your toes of your left foot and drop it in your hand. Switch to the right foot and pick up the coin. Note: Even if you can’t pick up the coin, just trying to pick it up will stretch and exercise these muscles.
Write the Alphabet: Works the quads, calves, ankles, and feet muscles. This exercise further strengthens the leg muscles and develops greater flexibility. While sitting, use the toes on the left foot to write out the alphabet. Point with your big toe like you are writing in the sand. At first try to write ‘A’ through ‘H’ (or whatever is comfortable). After you finish your letters, switch to the right foot and begin again.