If you are a regular reader, you probably noticed I have been a little late in posting articles this week.  I have been involved with other pressing matters and the mind just has not had time to focus on the blog for very long.  For this I apologize and hope that after Sunday, I will be back on schedule. 

You noticed, didn’t you.  I wrote “after Sunday.”  Yes, I will be out of town on Sunday.  My wife, her folks, and I are taking a road trip to the Georgia Aquarium.  We are looking forward to the trip because it gives me a chance to try out the new VMI modified van on a two hundred mile trip and none of us have been to the (billed) largest aquarium in the world.  I am bringing my snorkel and fins, just in case.






1.  Fall is here and winter is just around the corner … unfortunately.  This week our morning temperatures have been in the 40s and this weekend they could be in the high 30s.  Whenever it starts being this cold, my hands do not function very well.  This morning, I lost the use of my left thumb and index finger.  Talk about frustrating.  Not being able to button or unbutton your jeans or shirt is just one reminder that it is cold outside.  I knew it would happen, but I still am never quite prepared for the inconvenience. 

Another unwelcome benefit of the colder weather is the aches and pains that tend to show up.  It seems that every day this week I have one or more muscle groups cramping or just aching.  If the aches are bad enough, Ibuprofen seems to help when I cannot go to sleep at night. 

My strength (as measured by my normal exercise program) is about twenty-percent less than just a week ago.  The cold temperatures just seems to make it more difficult to exercise.  But, exercising is still a necessary part of my ongoing program to keep the motor neurons stimulating my muscles.

Do any of you experience anything similar during colder weather?

2.  Reminder:  Dr. J. Paul Taylor of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital is the scheduled guest on tomorrow’s KDA chat room.  Dr. Taylor will review the latest research and discuss its impact on finding a treatment for Kennedy’s Disease.

3.  Kennedy’s Disease Survey:  You might have noticed that the right hand column has a short (one question) survey.  Occasionally I will ask a question and report the results in an upcoming article.  I encourage you to answer the question because it might help me with topics for new articles. 

I also want to encourage you to comment (either below or by email) on anything related to Living with Kennedy’s Disease.  Your comments keep me going and help with ideas for future topics.