For those who share this same journey, you know how easy it is to become lost in the grungy shadowy alleyways of daily life. Fortunately, my three companions are with me every day to help keep me focused and from becoming sucked into the world known as “Kennedy’s Disease”. They provide comfort when I need it, a pick-me-up when I am down, and a reminder of all that is good in my life.

These three companions have been with me through thick and thin times. They have never deserted me no matter how difficult the situation.

Who are these three? They are:

Exercise,
Meditation, and my
Gratitude Journal

For those of you who follow my journey, these companions are not new to you. In fact, I hope they have become your trusted friends also. These three are at the core of my daily life and help me maintain a positive mental attitude. I cannot imagine what my life would be like without them.

Exercise: It is ingrained into my daily routine. At the beginning of each day, I do 10 to 15 minutes of breathing and leg exercises. After breakfast on the even calendar month days, I perform another 75-95 minutes of exercises. And, every 3-to-4 hours during the day, I perform a couple of minutes of standing exercises to keep the blood oxygenated and circulating. It also keeps my brain sharp-don't ask my wife to confirm this). And, right before bed, I perform 5 minutes of neck and shoulder exercises.

Meditation: 20 minutes are set aside each day for meditation and contemplation. No matter how busy I am, I find a way to commune with the silent peaceful world that is and always will be. It is a great grounding tool.

Gratitude Journal: Several times a day I am given the opportunity to experience the good as well as the many blessings in my life. By notating these moments, I redirect and regenerate my thought process. It is difficult to wallow in the gutters of discontent when a light shines on all the beauty that surrounds me. 

Who are your companions? How do they help and support your journey?

[Photo by WhiteFire4114]