Have you ever felt handicapped?  You know what I mean; that sense that someone is looking at you because you are in your wheelchair or scooter, or using your walker.

There are times I am still a little self-conscious about having to use a wheelchair in public.  Yes, I know, I am far safer these days and much more mobile, but sitting in a wheelchair … well … 

I received one of the nicest compliments the other day from a neighbor and friend.  We were talking football … our normal Friday and Saturday morning topic … when he mentioned something that meant a lot to me.

He said, “Whenever we get together, within a couple of minutes I forget you are in a wheelchair.” 
That comment made me feel “normal" ... you know, just one of the guys.  I was ready to stick some chaw in my mouth, grab a beer, and kick a few tires.

Even though I am not usually one to ponder how others view me, I tend to view myself as a person needing a wheelchair.  To have someone affirm that “I” and “wheelchair” are not part of the same perspective (when he thinks of me) removes this “less than” feeling I occasionally have of myself when in public.



I believe some of these feelings come from not being able to stand for long when having a conversation.  Coming from a sales background, making eye-contact and standing when being introduced to someone was normal for me.  Today, sitting, while everyone else is standing, is tough on the neck.  And, in some ways, is a social barrier … as in “being looked down upon” or “talked down to.”  I know that might sound crazy, but unfortunately that thought occasionally comes to mind. 

Having to drive a wheelchair through a large crowd of mingling people gives me a similar feeling.  My new chair helps to a degree because I can elevate the seat thirteen inches making me a little more eyelevel.  My other concern in large crowds is running over someone’s foot.

I realize this is just an “insecurity” of mine, but the feeling seems real to me at the time.   And, that is why the comment, “I forget you are in a wheelchair” meant enough to me to write about it in my blog.



How about you?  Do you occasionally feel handicapped?  Does not being able to stand while others around you are all standing frustrate or bother you? 