I have described those times where I wake up feeling substantially weaker. I call it 'the slide' because the day before it happens 'life is good' and everything seems to be going along just fine. Then I wake up and find it difficult to do almost anything. I never know how long I will be in the weaker state or if I will ever come out of it feeling stronger again.

I call the 'life is good' period 'the plateau'. It seems like my strength level has stabilized and I am more comfortable with my current capabilities.

'The slide' period is a difficult period for me both physically and emotionally. My muscles ache, my daily exercises are more difficult to perform, I just do not have the energy I normally have, just getting up and moving around is more difficult, and I can sense a new weakness that was not there before. As depicted in the picture above, the emotional aspect of 'the slide' is difficult. I do not know when I will reach the next plateau (when the slide will end) or where I will end up strength-wise. Fortunately, the plateaus last a lot longer than the slides. This break allows me to become comfortable with my new level of capabilities. Often, through focused exercise, I can come back a little.

As I become older, the slides seem to be less frequent, but more noticeable. When I was younger, the slides often occurred after over-doing it (I worked, exercised, or played too hard). Often after these events, I would have to rest for a day or more to recover. Since I am now substantially weaker, I believe the slides are more noticeable because of my current level of strength.

When I saw my neurologist last May and explained my most recent slide, he commented that he had never heard of something like this before. He questioned whether I was just having some emotional issues that were causing the physical symptoms. I convinced him that what I was experiencing was real and nothing to do with anxiety or depression. He then wanted to hear more about it. I promised to let him know the next time a slide occurs. He is a great doctor who listens and learns from my experiences.

This last Sunday was a good, normal day for me. Monday morning, I noticed that I was having difficulty with some of my exercises. Monday evening I was having difficulty standing up from my chair. This morning I was struggling to stand up and did not feel safe when standing for long. Is it the beginning of a slide? I hope not.

I would be interested to know if I am the only one that experiences these moments (then I would think it was psychosomatic) when you wake up weaker one day and struggle with the weakened state for several days.