One question I am often asked is where do I find information on benefits available for someone disabled.  Today, we are fortunate that we have access to the internet.  Almost any information or forms you need can be found ‘in the cloud’.  Below are a few examples of websites that provide information for those living with a disability.



Social Security Online has an entire section on Disability Benefits for People with Disabilities. Within this section there is information about:
How Social Security determines if you are disabled?
Social Security – Disability Insurance (SS-D) that pays benefits to individuals who can no longer work because of a disability.
Supplemental Security Income (SS-D) that will pay benefits based upon financial need.
How to apply for SS-D and/or SS-I?
If you are denied benefits, how to appeal the decision.
What Work Incentive Programs are available?
Also, Disability.gov is a good site that covers a variety of questions about programs available including military benefits.  It also has links to other sites and documents.

Another excellent resource is the Americans with Disabilities site.  The ADA has developed comprehensive resources concerning your rights, regulations, and programs available.  There is also several links to other government programs that provide resources or benefits for the disabled.



I hope you never have a discrimination issue because of your disability, but just in case the EEOC website is a good resource for issues regarding this subject.

The Department of Labor’s website, Office of Disability Employment Policy, is a place to help people with disabilities to find employment opportunities.

The Job Accommodation Network has information on ways to help a disabled person continue to work.  It works to benefit both employers and employees by providing practical solutions to common problems.  The ‘A-to-Z Listing if Disabilities and Accommodations’ is very good.

A website I have not used, but appears to have a good deal of information is called Disability Secrets .  It has information on a variety of disability subjects including Social Security and Workers Compensation.  Since it is a non-government site, I am not certain how or whether it receives compensation other than through advertising.

If you know of other sites that are also good resources, please let me know and I will post them.