If you are a frequent reader, you know that I occasionally discuss the Kennedy's Disease Association. This is one of those times that I believe something needs to be said about a concern of mine.

I believe the KDA needs some younger people to step up (become more active in the association). My concern stems from the fact that the average age of the Kennedy's Disease Association (KDA) board of directors is getting up there. Most of the board members are in the sixties and until two weeks ago the youngest member was in the mid-forties. Furthermore, the number of active committee members has declined over the last few years.

I know I am probably overreacting (as my parents did when the Beatles were introduced to America on the Ed Sullivan show). I recognize, however, that with the average age of the board members increasing and our physical capabilities declining that we need some younger blood and a more diverse board (ethnically as well as gender). Board members have also had to increase their involvement in committee activities because participation from volunteers has dwindled. Note: Just because I mentioned the younger generation in my header, that does not mean we will turn down more mature individuals who are willing to help.

I know that one of the best moves I ever made was joining the KDA. Ranking right up there with 'joining' was when I became a board member. I feel blessed to be able to work with this great team. Everyone contributes in his or her own way. The diversity of opinion and level of involvement varies, but the enthusiasm and support never wavers.

Since the KDA is an all-volunteer organization, we also have a need for people to serve on its various committees. The current committees are:

Fund Raising – This is still the lifeblood of the KDA. Without donations and other financial support, we cannot support research and education.
Public Relations – The KDA does not receive enough press. We need people who can write press releases and help with the newsletters.
Conference – This team plans and coordinates our educational conferences and symposiums.
Education and Research – We are always in need of people to search the internet for current research and other articles/resources that could benefit those living with Kennedy's Disease.
Support Groups (Subgroups include Carriers, Family Members and Friends, Wives and Significant Others, Support Forums, and Individuals with Symptoms) – These subgroups support those living with Kennedy's Disease. These volunteers respond to forum inquiries, host chat rooms, and provide support to those in need. I am certain this committee could do so much more to help if they had more volunteers.
Below are some general questions concerning the board and committee positions. If you have any specific questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to ask.

What committees would I serve on or chair?  It depends upon your interest and skill set.  You are not assigned to a committee; you choose one that you are interested in.

How much time will my committee involvement take up?   It depends on many factors.  If you are on the conference planning committee, it takes some weekly involvement (about 1-2 hours a week) for about three months and then some occasional involvement for about two months.  Some committees like fund raising take more time (perhaps up to 2-to-4 hours a month).  Time involvement is based more around the desires of the person serving.

Is any travel involved?  No travel is involved to serve on any committee.

What other roles might I be involved in?  That depends upon the circumstance and your desired level of involvement.  For example, a couple of years ago we decided to move our data off-site to a server with remote backup.  This took a small amount of time, but nothing substantial.  We have two people that quarterly audit the financial transactions/processes of our treasurer. 

I am working full time.  I am not certain how much time I can afford to give. Is that okay?  Several board and committee members are working full time.  They are not expected to volunteer a lot of time to perform regular KDA work, but they can still serve on committees and work on projects. 

What are you looking for in board and committee members? As mentioned above, we are looking for diversity of opinion, fresh ideas and people willing to help the KDA become a more viable organization. 

Is there any compensation or benefits?  I will not get into all the wonderful benefits (no compensation and rarely a thank you). Personally speaking, the rewards have been wonderful and I still feel it is a great opportunity and one that I thoroughly enjoy.

If I have not sold you yet on this challenging and exciting opportunity, I probably never will. Nevertheless, I had to try.