Well, it was delivered Thursday. My Permobil C300 PS2 wheelchair is here and I must say, "I am impressed." It has been 40 hours and I continue to find more to like. I just took my first nap in the chair (something I never could have done comfortably in my old chair) yesterday afternoon. It was a very nice (comfortable) forty-minute experience and something I look forward to again.

So far, this is a list of the likes and dislikes of the new chair.

Likes:
Seat cushion: It fits me like a glove and provides plenty of support.
Backrest: It provides tremendous support and is very comfortable. You seem to mold into the backrest.
Seat lift: The seat rises eight inches and makes it possible to talk almost eye-to-eye with anyone or accommodate different table heights. I can now stand up easily from the seated position.
Seat tilt: I was not certain I would use this feature, but I was wrong. It allows you to take the pressure off one area when sitting for long periods of time.
Back recline: This is a nice feature when you want to just relax or find a more comfortable position.
Leg lift: Again, I was not certain how much I would use this feature, but it sure makes sitting more comfortable.
Headrest: My other chair's headrest just seemed like an afterthought. This headrest is contoured and it can move forward, backwards, up or down.
Toggle switches: These allow me to operate the devices mentioned above without having to use the Profile button on the controller.
R-Net Controller: Some thought went into this because it is well designed, digital, and easy to read/understand. It also has the retractable joystick mount giving it the capability of sliding around and back of the armrest to help you sit closer to a table or desk.
Motors and transmissions: Quiet … something unheard of (or always heard) in my last chair.
Looks and overall design: Not only does it feel like it was made for me, it looks like it also.

Dislikes:
Not as portable: It does not fit in the back of our van because the high backrest does not fold down. Until then, I have to use the old chair when we go out. We start van shopping next week. It is something we have wanted to do for some time, but decided to wait until I bought my new chair.

As you can tell, it was well worth the wait. When you adjust the backrest, seat tilt, and leg lift, you can find a great position for watching TV or just napping. To read more about the process of selecting a chair, check out these older links: Seating Specialist, C500 vs. C300, and Power Wheelchairs and Medicare Part I and Part II. And, for a little humor about wheelchairs: Top Ten Benefits.

In closing, I would like to thank Bob, one of my blog readers. Bob owns a C300 and he highly recommended it to me.