In my last post, I discussed how to make the Social Security – Disability process work for you. In today's post, I want to provide a few more tips to help speed up the qualification process.

Preparation is the key - As mentioned yesterday, 'preparation' is half the battle. Below are several comments on how to help ease the reviewer (and others) through your disability application process. The easier it is for them, the easier it will be for you.

Discuss your intentions with your manager or supervisor and the need for their support. You do not want anyone to be surprised.
Advise your doctor(s) and his/her staff that you are applying for Social Security-Disability benefits. Ask the doctor(s) for his/her support. Review (preferably in written form) your current symptoms and any health-related issues that affect your ability to perform your current duties.
In the initial submission, provide the reviewer with as much information as possible – the more the better in this case. The more information the reviewer has to work with initially, the less information he/she has to write off for – meaning a delay in the process. The more information requested by the reviewer, the greater the chance the doctor's office will not be able to find it and/or it will be delayed.
If you control the information flow, you can make certain the most important information is in the front and that the important sections (information) are highlighted so the reviewer can easily find the critical information he/she needs to make a decision. Make certain the information submitted is readable and prioritized – in the order you want it presented. Be sure to sign and date all the forms.
Use the 'Supplemental Section' to educate the reviewer on what Kennedy's Disease (SBMA) is, its symptoms, its treatment, etc.
Provide the information in a 'report' format – tabbed, with page numbers and a table of contents, etc. - so the reviewer can easily locate the information he/she is looking for. Prepare a three-ring binder with the major sections tabbed. This will keep all of your information in one place and easy to find. The information should be in the same order and page numbers as submitted with the disability application. Keep a copy of everything submitted – just in case.
If called, refer to the information by section and page number so the reviewer can easily find the information he/she is looking for.
Take the binder with you to any reviews or hearings.
Be patient and responsive to follow-up inquiries by the reviewer.
If needed, follow-up with your doctor(s) and supervisor to insure they have provided the requested information.
How long does the process take? It generally takes longer to process claims for disability benefits than other types of Social Security claims - plan on 60 to 90 days. You can help shorten the process by bringing certain documents with you when you apply and helping the SSA to get any other medical evidence you need to show you are disabled. These include:

Your Social Security number and proof of age
Names, addresses and phone numbers of doctors, hospitals, clinics and institutions that treated you and dates of treatment
Names of all medications you are taking
Medical records from your doctors, therapists, hospitals, clinics and caseworkers
Laboratory and test results
A summary of where you worked and the kind of work you did
A copy of your W-2 Form (Wage and Tax Statement), or, if you are self-employed, your federal tax return for the past year
Dates of prior marriages and births of your children
Do not become frustrated. It is not uncommon to initially be denied. If that happens, schedule a meeting with your local Social Security Representative to review your application and ask for their opinion why the application was denied. Try to remove your emotions from this discussion. It is easy to become frustrated and start blaming the system or others, but try not to do it. Work with your representative to resolve any known issues with the application or concerns with your claim. The representative can be a great advocate. Then, file an appeal.

I hope this brief post helps to explain the process and some key 'learnings' based upon my experience. To learn more about the application process, contact your local Social Security Administration office, by going online to (http://www.ssa.gov/disability/) or, by calling 1-800-772-1213. The PDF guide I wrote can be found here: http://www.kennedysdisease.org/images/stories/PDFs/Social_Security-Disability.pdf.