Occasionally I receive an email or announcement that is better than article I could write for the day.  Yesterday morning was such a case.  The subject of the MDA webinar is one near and dear to my heart.  I would recommend that if you have the opportunity, attend the session.


Knowing Your Rights & Understanding How the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Impacts You
MDA is proud to offer an expert-hosted public webinar series for the MDA community. This installment, “Knowing Your Rights & Understanding How the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Impacts You,” will be hosted by Robyn Powell, disability rights program manager with the Equal Rights Center. Please join us as we discuss the resources, challenges and successes regarding these issues and the laws that protect individuals with a disability.

Topic: Knowing Your Rights & Understanding How the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Impacts You
Date and Time: April 26, 2011, 4 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time; 2 p.m. MDT; 1 p.m. PDT
Event password: advocacy1
Event address for attendees: https://mdaevents1.webex.com/mdaevents1/onstage/g.php?d=666443449&t=a

Interested individuals will need to pre-register to attend this session. To do so simply:
Click on the event link above.
On the events page, scroll down and click on the “register” button.
On the registration page, enter the registration password and click “submit.” For this session, the registration password is advocacy1.
You will be taken to a page where you will be asked to enter your name, email address and mailing address, and click “submit.” An automatic email will be generated and sent directly to you.
If you have questions about signing in and/or registration, please contact Alicia King at (202) 828-8560.

Note: Due to the large volume of callers and the amount of background noise associated with these calls, the lines will be muted during the presentation. We highly encourage you to submit your discussion-related questions in advance to advocacy@mdausa.org. They will be submitted directly to Ms. Powell and addressed in her presentation.


As any of my regular readers know, I have written several articles about the ADA and your rights under the ADA.  I feel it is in the best interest of all of us, whether disabled or not, to understand the rights of a disabled person.   