I hope you do not mind, but today's post is made up of some random thoughts.

Christmas

I hope your Christmas was good. I thoroughly enjoy this time of year. There is something special about it. Not only because of the religious aspects or the fact that it normally brings the family together, but also because many people seem to open up and seem to be happier during the holidays. It does not take much for someone to smile when thinking how his/her children will act when they see their gifts. In fact, just thinking about the joy on my nieces' faces this year brings a smile to mine.

Beginning sometime around Thanksgiving each year, I find myself singing Christmas carols. I believe this trait goes back to my childhood where my mother always sang while she worked around the house. Today, however, my wife gets a little tired of hearing the same songs sang every day, throughout the day, for a month or more. However, in the Spirit of Christmas, she puts up with it. One of my favorite carols is, "Little Drummer Boy." I also like other wintertime favorites including, "Let It Snow."

Childhood Memories

The Christmas season always brings back wonderful memories of my childhood.

I have always enjoyed singing. Some of my fondest memories relate back to Christmas Eve candlelight services where the entire family sang their hearts out. My father was tone-deaf, but that did not stop him from raising his voice in praise of the Lord. After the service, we would go home and enjoy a midnight chili or spaghetti dinner where the men (and boys) would wear dishtowels to protect their white shirts. My mother would also serve homemade buns (delicious). Does anyone make homemade breads anymore?

Speaking of homemade breads, as a child I often woke up to the smell of homemade bread and rolls. Whenever I go into a small bakery today, that smell brings back fond memories. I do not think there is anything better than homemade cinnamon rolls right out of the oven. Mom would also make her own piecrusts. Then, as a treat for us kids, she would roll out the leftover dough, cover it with cinnamon and sugar, and bake it. "Heaven, I'm in Heaven" just thinking about it (there I go singing again).

New Year's Resolutions


I am not one to make New Year's resolutions. I figure if I need to change something, then I should not wait until the end of a year to begin making the change. I also believe that if I make resolutions and do not follow through (break them) that it is demoralizing. However, since I know someone will ask what my resolutions are for 2010, here is my one resolution that I know I will keep.

I resolve that I will not make any resolutions for this coming year.

New Wheelchair

Several people have asked about the status of replacing my wheelchair. Well, it is still in limbo. The 'rep' commented that the demo model appears not to be a viable alternative. He has also received quotes on three other C500 chairs (including a stripped down model with no bells and whistles). I am beginning to wonder if a top of the line Buick would be as good as (or better than) a bare bones Cadillac. I just need to let the 'rep' work his magic and hope everything will work out for the best.

Hope

It amazes me how many of us that live with Kennedy's Disease need regular research updates. If the Kennedy's Disease Association does not publish the most current updates in a timely manner, we receive several emails asking what is happening. We live with the disease, but hope for a treatment or cure. I believe that "hope" provides many of us with a certain amount of strength. Yes, it would be nice to see a treatment or cure become available in my lifetime. Being realistic, however, I understand that I need to live my life to the fullest right now. I cannot sit around and wait for the discovery of a treatment. I have to "live for today, and maintain hope for tomorrow."

Happy New Year


Since I will not be posting an article tomorrow, I want to wish you a safe, healthy and happy 2010. Thanks for being a regular reader of my blog.