In case you missed it, the big news this week is the FDA fast-tracked the approval of a treatment for ALS. You can read about it here:  CNN Health and here:  FDAPress Release.

This is fantastic news for those living with ALS.

I have received a few inquiries asking if this drug could be helpful for treating Kennedy’s Disease.

First off, I am not a doctor and not as knowledgeable as some others with KD concerning this topic. What I do know is that ALS is a condition that attacks the upper motor neurons. Kennedy’s Disease attacks the lower motor neurons. For this reason, I do not believe the new drug will be beneficial for those of us living with KD.

So what is the difference between the two upper and lower motor neurons? I found the following explanation to be helpful.

“Upper motor neurons originate in the motor region of the brain stem. They are not responsible for the stimulation of the muscle which is targeted as they do not carry information down to the final common pathway. They work through a neurotransmitter called glutamate which transmits the nerve impulses from upper to lower motor neurons where it is detected by glutamatergic receptors. On the other hand, lower motor neurons receive impulses from the upper motor neurons and connect the spinal cord and brain stem to the muscle fibers. They are the cranial and spinal nerves. They work by making use of the glutamate which is released from the upper motor neurons, and this triggers depolarization in the lower motor neurons. A series of actions occur which end up signalling the muscle to contract. The cell bodies of the lower motor neurons are located in the neuraxis, and their axons leave and synapse with the muscles in the body. On the other hand, the upper motor neurons synapse with the lower motor neurons as they are unable to leave the central nervous system.”
Source:  DifferenceBetween Net


Nonetheless, even if this new treatment is not the answer, it is progress and a help for those living with ALS. 