As almost everyone knows that is living with Kennedy’s Disease, the flu can be devastating because of our inability to clear the lungs and the strength to work through the condition. I lost a brother that also had Kennedy’s Disease to pneumonia. Over the last three years I have published several articles on the subject and always recommend the annual flu shot (and a pneumonia shot if you haven’t already had one).

The Full-Time Nanny blog has some great articles on a variety of subjects. The article below has a variety of links to flu information. There is a lot of information that I didn’t know. Take a look when you have a chance.
 
If you read no other article, read this one Influenza and Children With Neurologic Disorders . Yes, we are far from being children, but we do have a neurological disorder. The one sentence that caught my attention almost immediately: “It has long been known that people of any age with a neurologic condition are more likely to suffer severe consequences from a respiratory disease.”

Also, Dr. Paul Taylor, a member of the KDA's Scientific Review Team, wrote an article that will be of interest to parents.  The title is, "How to choose between the flu-mist and the flu shot for your children."
 
So, the question for today is: Have you had your flu shot?
 
_____________________________
  30 Blogs with Good Information on the Seasonal Flu
Posted on October 7, 2012 by admin | in Nanny
As the weather begins to cool and the days start to get shorter, parents’ minds generally turn towards the upcoming flu season and the best ways to prevent illness in their household. Unfortunately, there are so many misconceptions surrounding the transmission, incubation period, best course of treatment and even vaccinations that figuring out the best course of action can be a challenge. These 30 blog entries offer information on several aspects of the seasonal flu.

What is Influenza?
The first step in treating flu symptoms or preventing them altogether is to understand what influenza is, how it’s transmitted, and what signs or symptoms typically accompany an infection. These five blog posts are all dedicated to explaining what flu is, helping readers to better understand it.
Influenza 101
What is Flu?
On Influenza A (H1N1)
What is Flu? Difference Between Flu, Stomach Flu, Cold and More
What’s New with Flu?
Treatment for Flu?
While there is currently no cure for influenza, there are treatments that can help to alleviate some of the symptoms. In these blog posts, various methods of minimizing your suffering during a bout with the flu are discussed.
Treat Flu Symptoms
Flu Treatment Options
Standard Flu Treatment
Super Antibody Could Provide Universal Flu Treatment
Treating Flu Symptoms Sensibly – What to Do if You Think You Have Been Exposed to Flu
Contagion and Incubation Periods for Flu
Understanding how to prevent the spread of flu between family members requires a basic knowledge of incubation periods and how long an infected person can transmit the flu virus to others. In the interest of providing this essential information, these bloggers attempt to clarify facts and dispel rumors surrounding influenza contagion.
How Long is the Flu Contagious?
Flu Symptoms in Incubation
When are Colds and the Flu Most Contagious?
Incubation Period of the Flu
Study Finds Swine Flu is Contagious Days After Fever Ends
Flu Vaccine Information
Though a seasonal flu shot is strongly recommended for certain groups of people, there’s quite a bit of controversy surrounding the vaccine. Information about flu vaccines is varied and often inaccurate, making it difficult for many people to determine whether or not receiving a flu shot is the right choice for them and their family members.
Fear Mongering the Flu Vaccine
What You Need to Know About the 2012/2013 Flu Vaccine
Flu Vaccine Facts: Who Should Get It, Who Shouldn’t and Why
Debunking the Flu Shot Myths
The Shocking Lack of Evidence Supporting Flu Vaccines
Preventing the Flu without Vaccination
If you’re among the people that vaccination against influenza is not recommended for, or have simply chosen not to receive a flu shot, there are still steps you can take to reduce your chances of contracting the flu virus. These five bloggers offer advice for minimizing your flu risk and helping to prevent the spread of influenza in your household.
How to Dodge the Flu Without a Shot
How to Prevent and Cure the Flu Naturally Without a Vaccine
How to Avoid the Flu Without Firing a Shot
Avoid Flu Shots, Take Vitamin D Instead
Fighting Flu Without the Flu Shot
Influenza and Possible Complications
While it often seems strange to think that people still die from what is often regarded as a minor, albeit miserable, illness, the fact is that complications from influenza do cause a significant number of deaths around the country each year. In fact, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates 36,000 people will die from influenza and resulting complications. These five blog entries discuss possible complications, providing valuable information to those that may not realize just how serious the flu can be.
Influenza and its Complications
Influenza and Children With Neurologic Disorders
Warning Signs That Flu is Serious
Pneumonia: a Dangerous Complication of the Flu
Complications Can Arise During Course of Flu