Fortunately, my wife and I are pretty healthy. We hardly ever are down with a cold or the flu. Yet, it seems like when my wife does come down with something, she gets a full dose of it (not easily shaken). This last week she caught a cold-or-flu type bug that she cannot seem to shake. I know she is not feeling well when she takes two or three naps during the day and goes to bed around 8:00 at night.

I talked with both our families this week. When I mentioned that Cindy was not 100%, they also asked if I had come down with the bug. My reply (a standard response of mine throughout the years) is that "Men just come from stronger stock ... it takes more than a little cold (or flu) bug to get us down." Of course my reply always causes the caller (if of the female gender) to come back with some negative response. They just cannot accept that men are healthier and tougher then they are. I attribute this resistance to illness to the "hunter" genes that men are born with. We fought the wars, killed the dinosaurs, and brought home the game for the women to prepare. As hunters, we did not have the luxury of staying in bed if we were not well. We had to hunt or the family would starve.

Women, on the other hand, have always been "gatherers." They go out and pick things (like berries or flowers). If it was wintertime and nothing was growing, the women would just sit around the cave (teepee, or hut) and wait for the man to bring home something to eat. Talk about a great life.

By now, I hope you realize that I am just having a little fun today. Our years together have shown me that my wife is tougher than I am. No matter how bad she feels, she still believes there is a need to take care of me (prepare the meals, do the laundry, etc.). She knows that I will get by, but still feels some an obligation to perform certain duties around the house no matter how sick she is. To further the point, I have never given birth (nor do I want to), had to worry about female hormonal issues, or felt responsible for all the household duties. Even when she was working (outside the home), she still felt it was necessary to prepare all the meals, as well as do the laundry or clean the house before going to bed at night.

My philosophy, on the other hand, is slightly different. If there is no meal to throw into the microwave, call Dominos. If I become tired of pizza, drive to a McDonalds, Hardees, or Subway. The laundry needs to go to the cleaners once a week. House cleaning is what cleaning services do for a living. Furthermore, I would only drive to one grocery store and buy what I like to eat ... whether it is on sale or not. I would also eat all meals in front of the television. I think you get the idea. Of course I would probably die within a few years because of my diet.

As you can tell, I love my wife dearly and she makes me a better person. I hate to see her not feeling 100% at any time. That being said, I still feel that men come from stronger stock (just kidding).

P.S. – My wife, being the giving person she is, passed the bug along to me a couple of days ago. It has to be a conspiracy, right?