but … I am at a loss for words. YIKES!

I am sitting here this morning trying to come up with a new topic. One thing I have learned about writing is that when you are not inspired, just start writing whatever comes to mind and then go with the flow. So here we go …

It is hard to believe that over the last eight months I have written 130 articles related to Kennedy's Disease and living with Kennedy's Disease. The articles have covered a wide range of subjects from embarrassing moments to interviews with researchers. Some of the most interesting articles for me are those concerning current research. It seems like every time I write one of these articles I learn something in the process. I definitely am not an expert on Kennedy's Disease, but I know enough to be dangerous.

I find it interesting that my audience continues to grow (up 9% this month). Over the last thirty days there have been 1,523 page views with visitors reading an average of 1.9 pages per visit. Almost fifty percent of the page views were by first time visitors. The two stories on IGF-1 (Part I and II) were the most read articles during this period. Readership has increased to a daily range of 16-30 visitors with the average being 22. This is wonderful news for me, because I was not sure how many people might be interested in my ramblings. It just shows that there are insomniacs out there that need something other than counting sheep to put them to sleep.

I keep on looking for ways to improve the quality of my articles. I want readers to find them interesting and entertaining, but also educational. For years I found it difficult to talk openly about Kennedy's Disease, but fortunately I was able to break away from my fears and apprehensions and just lay it out there. That is not saying that I still do not have taboo subjects. They are far fewer than before, but they are still there. My hope is that someday soon I can break through these last few barriers and write openly about those topics. What topics, you ask? You will have to stick around to find out.

To improve this blog, however, I need your help. I would appreciate it if you would let me know (by adding a comment or sending me an email) what subjects you would like tackled or questions you have always wanted to ask, but haven't. Your help will steer me in the right direction and perhaps further improve my knowledge of the disease as well as what it is like living with it. So, don't be bashful and let me know what you think. Besides continuing to keep you updated with current research …

What subjects would you like to know more about?
What questions do you still have that I might be able to help answer or find someone that can answer them for you?
How can I improve this blog?
Oh, and reference my asking you to not mention this little problem to my wife; go for it, she would never believe it anyway.