About twenty years ago, my wife and I visited Vancouver, BC. We loved the city. There was so much to do that it was difficult to figure out what we were going to take time to see. Of course, Stanley Park was a favorite with the bike trails, zoo, and aquarium. We also enjoyed Queen Elizabeth Park with its observatories, trails, and gardens. While at QE Park, we saw about thirty to forty Chinese men, women and children practicing Tai Chi. Just watching them perform fascinated me. The participants were perfectly coordinated in their movement. Several of the participants were elderly, but their movements were still very precise. After watching them, I commented to my wife that I have to try that.

When we returned home, I purchased a VHS tape on Beginner's Tai Chi. Whether I was home or traveling on business, I took time every day to practice. After a few weeks, I noticed an improvement in my strength and coordination. About six months or so later, I purchased an Intermediate Tai Chi video. For a few years, I did very well and enjoyed the improved strength, balance and energy. Eventually, however, I noticed that I could not hold the postures for as long and my one-legged movements and turns were becoming more difficult to perform. As my strength continued to wane, the free-slowing movements became more difficult and not as fluid.

Then about ten years ago, my boss, knowing of my health issue, mentioned that he was seeing a Qigong master (a medical doctor in China) in Los Angeles because of a health issue. He asked if I would be interested in meeting him. I did not really know a lot about Qigong, except what I had read and heard about in my Tai Chi instruction, but I was game. I could write several thousand words on my visit because it was a unique experience, but in the interest of brevity, I will just say it was fascinating. After just an hour's visit, I felt lighter, stronger and more full of energy than I had felt in some time. When I returned home, my wife could not believe how easily I walked up the stairs to our bedroom. The sensations (strength and energy) lasted for several days, but after about a week, I noticed that things were returning to normal (bummer).

I realized that I could not afford to travel across the country several times a year to see this master, so I went online and to try to find someone closer that could perform the same service. Meanwhile, my sister-in-law was traveling and mentioned my experiences to a business friend. He told her about a Qigong master in Michigan that had helped him. Moving ahead in the story … I eventually went to Michigan and spent a week living in the master's home learning the techniques of Qigong. As with Tai Chi, I practiced Qigong daily and found them beneficial. I went back once a year for refresher courses and to learn more advanced techniques. At the KDA Conference in 2002, I gave a presentation on Qigong.

Unfortunately, as my Kennedy's Disease progressed, it became more difficult to travel and, even worse, more difficult to perform the postures. I still practice a portion of the routines today, but I have not been as disciplined as I would like to be.

I would recommend Tai Chi and Qigong to anyone. Both programs are excellent disciplines that are very helpful in improving the mind, body and spirit. Tai Chi is very helpful in helping to maintain the muscles used for balance. Qigong, however, can be practiced standing, sitting, or even in the prone position, once you have the techniques down.


 
Please feel free to comment. By taking a moment to share your thoughts you add much to these articles. The articles then become more than just something I said or believe. In addition, by adding a comment, you might just be helping the next reader by sharing your opinion, experience, or a helpful tip. You can comment by clicking on "comments" below or by sending me an email. I look forward to hearing from you.