This will be my last post until after the holidays. Over the next several days, we will be celebrating the Spirit that is Christmas with family and friends. Our focus this year will be on making this holiday season extra special for two people that we love dearly.

Looking Back Upon the Last Couple of Years

It is said, "You should never judge another man (person) until you have walked two moons in his (or her) moccasins." Because of these last few years, I am gaining a greater understanding of what this saying means. Except for a few minor hiccups now and again, our life (my wife and I) has been blessed in so many ways. These last couple of years have been a challenge, however. Yes, the economy has wreaked havoc on several members of our family. Even more important, however, because of the death of a dear friend, serious health concerns in my wife's family, and several health scares in my family, we are being challenged in ways we have never experienced before. Through this period, we have gained a greater understanding of our current health care system (both the good and the bad). Needless to say, it has been and continues to be a growth opportunity for us.

My First Five Months of Blogging

Back in August when I decided to start this blog (web log); I was not certain if I could write three-to-four posts a week for very long. I felt I had a message for those of us living with Kennedy's Disease. And, I had always enjoyed writing, but I did not want to feel tied down by the blog (I did not want it to become work). I also realized that I had a very selective audience … those living with Kennedy's Disease as well as family and friends. When I first considered starting the blog, my concerns were:
How do I keep it interesting?
Will people even read it?
How do I keep the content personal, entertaining, and educational (without preaching)?
Can I sustain it for very long (will the stories continue to flow)?
How do I keep it fun for me?
Five months later, I still harbor some of those concerns. "Living with Kennedy's Disease" has had 516 unique visitors. This month I am averaging 16-25 visitors a day. I receive at least one-to-two comments a week. Some of the comments reflect empathy and support, while others find the information provided helpful and interesting. Still others are appreciative that I have come out of the closet, so to speak, to tell my personal story (the good, the bad, and the ugly) of living with Kennedy's Disease. Thank you all for your kind thoughts and support. Your comments make it easier to come back to the keyboard every day or two to write another article.

I cannot sign off without asking that you keep the men and women of our armed forces, along with their families, in your hearts and prayers this holiday season. They need our support.

Come back and visit again after the first of the year. Until, then …

I wish you and yours, "Peace and Love," along with "Health and Happiness," during this holiday season and throughout the coming year.

Merry Christmas

&

Happy Holidays