I have been feeling very good recently. I am amazed at the improvement in strength. I am not saying I am ready to run a race or enter a weightlifting contest, but it sure is nice to add reps to my morning exercises without straining or making my muscles feel abused afterwards. My every-other day routine is now up to ninety minutes of exercises. The lighter (in between) days are still 20-30 minutes.

I believe part of the difference is the warmer weather. I just seem to function better when it is warmer. I now understand why my brother moved to Arizona. I also attribute some of the improvement to my exercise program. I have only missed one day (Christmas 2008). Even though I still struggle occasionally, these last couple of months have been pure joy!

My legs have not seen near the improvement as my arm, shoulder and hand strength. However, the legs improved the most in the first year and have remained strong thereafter. It is also good to have the use of my left index finger and thumb again.

I find that I am happier after a good workout. Yes, I know about endorphins (Endorphins are released in response to pain or sustained exertion causing, e.g., the "runner's high"). The diencephalon, in the limbic area of the brain, stimulates the production of dopamine and endorphins. Most of my life
I have been addicted to endorphins. They helped eliminate (after a good run or racquetball game) a lot of stress during my working years. They have saved me a couple of times when I had a serious injury. Today, endorphins start working for me about halfway through my workouts. Afterwards, I feel a deep sense of accomplishment and general wellbeing.

Another part of this happiness has to do with the sense of accomplishment I feel afterwards. I stimulated my motor neurons (keeping them firing is important) and muscles and improved blood flow to all parts of the body. These exercises keep me in the game.

I continue to hope that the National Institute of Health (NIH) will sponsor a clinical trial on exercise. I feel that the more people understand the primary, secondary and tertiary benefits of exercise, the more they will be willing to try it. Of course, any good exercise program has to be practiced in moderation. I learned early on the negative aspects of exercise when done to excess. However, a well-rounded, regularly practiced program focused on stretching, aerobics, and (light) weight lifting can change your life … mentally, emotionally and physically.

Try it … you'll like it!