The KDA annual conference and educational symposium begins tomorrow in San Diego.  I wish I could have gone, but that length of travel is out of the question these days.  Unfortunately, we lost the heating system in our house yesterday (Brrrr!) and it is a little cool this morning making San Diego sound even more enticing.  The repairmen are here and I hope we will have heat soon.  In the meantime, I am wearing gloves and have a blanket wrapped around me trying to stay warm and keep my fingers operational enough to type this article.
 
The conference’s agenda looks very interesting this year and I am looking forward to hearing from some of the attendees afterwards.  I believe there are seventeen doctors and researchers attending and their presentations should be very interesting.  I hope the updates on ASC-J9 and IGF-1 will be positive.  They still appear to be the treatments with the most promise.  Dr. Taylor’s update on the recent research into the triggering mechanism for Kennedy’s Disease will also be interesting.  One thing I know for sure, attendees will leave the conference with a new sense of hope and a greater appreciation of what these researchers go through in their attempts to find a treatment for Kennedy’s Disease.



Even now, with potential clinical trials close at hand, the possibility of a treatment is still at least a couple of years away.  Patience (not an attribute of mine) is difficult as you watch the disease progress.  Earlier in life, you felt there was still plenty of time.  Now days, with the progression at a point where mobility and capabilities are far more limited, another two or three years without a treatment seems daunting.  Yet, hoping, praying and waiting are really the only things we can do.

I asked the question in the header, “Is patience part of the acceptance process?”  As I mentioned, I have never been one to have a lot of patience.  I was a “type A” personality at work believing that, along with a little luck, you created your own breaks, and that sitting back and waiting is not the way to achieve your goals.  Yet, since I am not a researcher, I am forced to sit back and “patiently” wait. 



I did find one thing to help the process move along.  I can make a donation for Kennedy’s Disease research.  KDA research grants support the “front-line” troops (the researchers) helping them move ever closer to finding that needed treatment.

In the meantime, I will sit at my computer accepting that I have this condition and patiently waiting for the news we all want to hear.