I don't normally post topics other than those related to progressive motor neuron conditions and resources, but Virgil Anderson, a cancer survivor, asked if he could post something on my blog. Since cancer has become an intruder in the lives of family and friends, I decided to post his article,
__________________________

Resources for Patients with Mesothelioma


Mesothelioma is a terrible type of cancer because it is aggressive, spreads quickly, and is often diagnosed in the later stages, when treatment options are limited. But getting a mesothelioma diagnosis does not have to come with no hope. There are resources available for those who need them, and these include medical, legal, and financial resources.

Medical Resources for Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a cancer that most often attacks the pleura, the two layers of tissue surrounding the organs of the chest cavity. It is most commonly caused by exposure to asbestos and has a long latency period, so that by the time a person has symptoms that can be diagnosed, the cancer is already well developed and in many cases even metastatic.

This is a rare cancer, and one that is difficult to treat, so finding the best medical resources is crucial. A diagnosis may start with a patient’s general practitioner, but consultation with a specialist is necessary to get the best treatment. An online search can pull up mesothelioma specialists, but certain medical centers also provide great resources. Places like the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston and the Pacific Mesothelioma Center in Los Angeles are home to experts in the treatment of this disease.

Legal and Financial Resources
Many people who developed mesothelioma did so because they were exposed to asbestos in the workplace without knowing they were being put at risk. This means that many employers, including the U.S. military, as well as manufacturers of asbestos materials, can be blamed and sued for mesothelioma diagnoses.

A legal team that specializes in mesothelioma and asbestos can be a great legal resource to help patients decide if they have a case to make and then to file lawsuits that will win them settlements. In addition to lawsuits, mesothelioma patients may have access to asbestos trust funds, funds set up by companies to pay for future cases of mesothelioma in their past employees.

Resources for Veterans
Veterans of the U.S. military, especially those from the Navy, may have suffered more asbestos exposure than any other group of people. Through the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), these mesothelioma patients can find specialized resources. Veterans can apply for VA compensation for asbestos exposure and must meet certain requirements. These include being exposed to asbestos during military service and being diagnosed with mesothelioma or another illness caused by that exposure.

How Mesothelioma.net Can Help
There are many resources for patients with mesothelioma, and it can get confusing. Mesothelioma.net offers one consolidated resource with information about medical treatments, financial assistance, asbestos trust funds, resources for veterans, and more. When you contact our site, we will send free information and can help connect you to legal experts, patient advocates, and other experts who will get you the help you need.