Sometimes I become frustrated because I want to help more, but I am limited in the ways I can provide assistance. An example follows:

A woman from Georgia moved to a foreign country to work and eventually married. A couple of years after their marriage, he was diagnosed with Kennedy's Disease. After five years in this country, they have decided to move back to her home in Georgia. Since she is a U.S. citizen, there is no issue for her. Her husband, however, now in his mid-40's, is not a U.S. citizen and our State Department is refusing to issue him a visa because he has Kennedy's Disease and, in their opinion, will be a drain on our welfare system. Even though the couple has a home, car, and bank account in Georgia, it does not matter. Because they do not have jobs here in the States and health insurance coverage, he is considered a possible welfare case.

She has written many letters to our State Department, provided information from his neurologist, and even hired an attorney, but there always seems to be some catch that the State Department adds to the discussion before they will issue a visa. They have told her that she can come back to the States and after she has a job and health insurance, she can reapply for her husband's visa. As you can imagine, she is not crazy about leaving him behind.

I will not go into the details, because they are not important in this post. I will say that I wrote the State Department on her behalf explaining that people with Kennedy's Disease live long, productive lives and are often as healthy, or healthier, than the average person is. I also said that since there is no treatment or cure, the degree of medical attention required because of his condition is minimal. I went on to mention that since Kennedy's Disease does not affect the cognitive ability of the individual, that there are many jobs perfectly suited for a person with this health condition. In closing, I gave them the Kennedy's Disease Association website address and asked them to contact me if they had additional questions or concerns concerning Kennedy's Disease.

This is a roundabout way of getting to the point of the post. Often, people judge others based upon their looks and physical capabilities. A wheelchair, nasal voice, drooping mouth, or inability to walk normally (I think you get the idea), can create a wrong impression in some people. They do not see the individual; they see the condition and make a snap judgment.

I am hoping the couple mentioned above can resolve this issue with our State Department so they can move to the U.S. I also hope that the person(s) denying the visa learn something positive through their handing of this case. For the few times we are unable to help, there are many other times that we do make a difference in someone's life.

I just wish I could do more.