About a month ago at the MDA clinic, the ALS Coordinator felt that the wheelchair I was currently using was not a good fit for me. She recommended that I go through an evaluation to determine what type of chair and seating arrangement I should have. After receiving a referral from my doctor, last Tuesday, I went to the Emory University Hospital, Rehabilitation Center, in Atlanta to see a "seating specialist" (who or whatever that is).

Laura, the seating specialist, is a physical therapist who specializes in fitting a person to a wheelchair. She spent two hours with me Tuesday morning interviewing me and testing my physical strength, before she started to evaluate what I needed in a wheelchair. Laura then began to measure my body. It seemed that she measured every aspect of it (distance from the bottom of the knee to the bottom of the foot, distance from the inside of my knee to the back of the buttocks, distance from my shoulder to my buttocks, etc.) I swear that she took at least twenty measurements. After she was through measuring, she then began explaining what was wrong with my current chair and how it was affecting my posture, circulation, energy level, and safety.

After discussing my current and future needs, Laura then explained that once I picked out a chair, and if Medicare approves it, the manufacturer would build the chair from the ground up so that it fit me perfectly. Within the work area, there was at least twenty-five demo chairs including several brands I had never heard of before. After explaining the pros and cons of several models and manufacturers, Laura felt I should test-drive the Permobil C500. She then found a seat pad that I should consider and after the chair was set up for me, I gave it a try.

WOW! Once you have sat in the best, it is hard to go back. I could not believe how comfortable the chair was. I sat up straight without effort and felt totally at ease. The seat cushion was great. The seatback fit me so well that I could not believe how good I felt. Then, they had me use the seat lift. It was wonderful. I now could be eye-to-eye with others that were standing instead of having to look up all the time. The lift and tilt features made it so easy to stand up and transfer. I was no longer leaning way forward trying to get my weight over my knees. I then tried the recliner mode, and in that position, I felt as good as if sitting in my LazyBoy recliner. Laura also showed several other features that the chair afforded me and each was something I had never considered, but now I wished I had.

After I had convinced myself that the C500 was the way to go, reality set in. Only two words can describe my feeling … $ticker $hock! I could not believe the cost. Instead of WOW, I caught myself saying Whoa! The honeymoon was officially over and reality had once again set in.

So, where do we go from here? Laura is preparing a letter for Medicare. My rehab specialist is crunching numbers. In a few weeks, I should know whether there is a possibility that the C500 and I could become best friends. The only problem I can see happening is that I will have to settle for something less.

No matter what happens, I feel that a seating specialist is the way to go for anyone considering a wheelchair. These people know what they are doing. I would recommend to anyone considering a wheelchair to contact the MDA regional office to find the nearest seating specialist in his or her area.

Wish me luck! I think I am going to need it.