Most of my regular readers know that I am not a patient person.  I work on it all the time, but sometimes I fail miserably.  I also know that frustrations cause stress and that exacerbates the weakness we already experience.

There are a few things in life, however,  that really push my buttons.  Buggy software … misleading information … packages that are not meant to be opened by mere mortals … and, the one annual event that was personally designed to cause me pain and suffering.  I am referring to filing income taxes.



This process causes my blood pressure to rise, my neck muscles tighten and my head to pound.  I have prayed for a flat tax or even a simplified tax … or, at the very least, instructions that are understandable to the average “Joe’.  Yet, every year, come February and early March, this event takes it toll on me.

We use Turbo Tax software and that helps.  My wife spends days ahead of time preparing the information and that really helps.  Yet, for all the preparation and the guidance of intuitive software, the task always ends up at a stalemate.

Something does not make sense or cannot be added where it should go.  Or, some rule or instruction is poorly written.  It always seems to be something that brings the entire process to a standstill.  Online searches and even calls to the IRS do not leave you with a ‘warm and fuzzy feeling’ that you now have the right answer.  FRUSTRATION!!!!!



Over the last two days I have had to call a ‘time-out’ three times to just get away from the project.  I know, the simple answer would be to hire a tax consultant.  That is not my wife’s way, however.  She is meticulous in anything that she does and feels more confident in her own abilities than a tax preparer.

Sitting here writing about it helps.  A sh0rt meditation break helps.  Taking my dog out for a walk helps.  Just walking away for a couple of hours also helps.  Yet, until my wife has given the document her seal of approval (every ‘i’ is dotted and ‘t’ crossed), the annual process wears on me.

When will I learn to just:
close my eyes …
breathe in slowly … exhale …
relax …
think of peaceful, loving thoughts …
see the beauty of spending time with my wife …
and, be thankful that we make enough money to pay taxes


Okay, I feel a little better.  It is time to get back to work on those taxes.  Thanks for listening.