We are being snowed in again. We already have three inches on the ground and it is supposed to snow for several more hours. This is the fourth or fifth time this year we have not been able to get off the hill. In our seven years living here, this is the first year we have had this problem (snowed-in or iced-in). "But, who is complaining … not me!" I did get Fred, my Beagle, out early this morning when it was sleeting. We will not be going for any more walks today. Our driveway and the hill are just too steep and ice over easily. Since we live in the country, we have to wait for the melt because our county does not maintain these roads.

This past week I have been spending a lot of time moving my short stories to Blogger. The link to my new site is The Writer's Corner. The reason for the move is laziness. WordPress uses different coding than Blogger. Since I have my Living with KD blog on Blogger, I found it a little frustrating to move between services (trying to remember two applications and different coding versus one). I still have several more stories to post, but I am happy with the results. I have added more pictures and cleaned up a little of the writing. In the process, I also transferred 123 comments. That was the hardest part of the project, but I felt it was important to keep everyone's thoughts.

I just sent out an announcement about the new KDA polo shirts. The response so far has been excellent. This week I also plan to send out the Kennedy's Disease Association (KDA) Annual Report. I finished writing it this weekend and I believe it tells a good story (accomplishments and 2010 goals).

Well, we are doing are taxes this morning, so I will sign off for now.


 
Please feel free to comment. By taking a moment to share your thoughts you add much to these articles. The articles then become more than just something I said or believe. In addition, by adding a comment, you might just be helping the next reader by sharing your opinion, experience, or a helpful tip. You can comment by clicking on "comments" below or by sending me an email. I look forward to hearing from you.