Serum creatine kinase, or CPK or CK, levels have been a warning sign of the possibility of many disorders including Kennedy's Disease, aka Spinal Bulbar Muscular Atrophy. Long before I knew I had Kennedy's Disease and before DNA testing was available, my doctor noticed the elevated CPK levels and wanted further testing done. Some of these tests were not a lot of fun. Fortunately, the DNA test is much easier, far less expensive, and more accurate.

As I mentioned in earlier articles, in the last few years my CPK (or CK) count has declined to the high end of the normal level. I can only guess why this has happened (less muscle mass = less wasting).

Yet, it is interesting that there is a strong correlation between elevated CPK and Kennedy;s Disease. While doing some research on the subject, I came across four recently updated articles on the link between Kennedy's Disease and CPK (CK).

1. The Better Health Channel updated their webpage on Kennedy's Disease, aka Spinal Bulbar Muscular Atrophy. The article is well written and easy to understand. It mentions elevated CPK as one of the symptoms, Click here to go to the link.

2. Disabled World also has information on elevated CPK and its potential link to Kennedy's Disease. The article is titled, Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK) Test: Facts & Information. Click here to go to the link.

3. Medscape's article on Kennedy's Disease has this to say about elevated CPK levels. "Problems may arise in resolving apparent positive results obtained before genetic testing is done. For instance, serum creatine kinase (CK) testing is not indicated, yet the CK level may be elevated substantially. One of the author's patients had been treated for inflammatory myopathy for years before the correct diagnosis was made. In another case, the patient was aggressively treated for myasthenia gravis (including thymectomy) before KD was diagnosed.[63] Sorenson and Klein have also reported elevation in CK and transaminases levels in asymptomatic patients with KD." Click here to go to the link.

4. Prezi has a short slideshow on Kennedy's Disease and also links elevated CPK levels as a possible symptom. Click here to go to the link.