I believe I mentioned in an earlier post that contributions for Kennedy's Disease research were substantially lower this year. We had hoped to fund more research grants, but actually had to dip into savings and operating reserves to fund the three top grants. Until the economy turns around and contributions improve, the KDA, like everyone else, has to tighten its belt and scrutinize all expenditures.

Today, I received word that the MDA is also cutting expenses and reducing benefits because of reduced contributions. Below is an excerpt from the MDA letter explaining their current financial situation.

"We're currently struggling with developing a balanced budget for 2010, which means further expense reductions. To date, we've closed 2l field offices and retrenched 120 positions. We're continuing the reduction of clinic grants by l0%, as well as reducing by 5% second and third-year funding for research grant renewals. Nonetheless, we now find ourselves needing to make the following cost adjustments in order to preserve to the greatest extent possible our most critical research and services initiatives. Accordingly, effective January 1, 2010, MDA will no longer:

o Assist with the purchase of new durable medical equipment. We'll make every effort to meet equipment needs through our National Equipment Resource Program (formerly MDA equipment loan closets).

o Cover the cost of transportation to MDA clinic appointments. MDA staff stands ready to assist with obtaining transportation to clinics through local resources."

New durable equipment includes braces, wheelchairs, communications devices, and other orthopedic equipment. If you were planning to receive any support from the MDA for any durable medical equipment, I would recommend that you contact your local or regional MDA office immediately for additional information on what this cutback means to you.

What hurts even more is the reduction in new clinical grants and grant renewals supported by the MDA. Researchers need the support of the KDA and MDA to help continue their research projects.

Let us hope that the economy continues to move in a positive direction in 2010.