Several years ago I read this Scott Hamilton quote and thought it was perfect. At the time, Scott had a brain tumor and cancer. He did not let that hold him back, however. He eventually beat the cancer and today continues to write books and inspire others through his speaking engagements and philanthropy.

The dictionary defines "Disability" as a condition that makes it difficult to engage in the activities of daily life. If someone has a bad attitude, they are definitely 'no longer able' to engage in normal daily activities.

Attitude plays such an important part in our lives. John, a friend and member of the KDA board of directors is another one of us living with Kennedy's Disease. He is also a man that always seems to have a positive perspective on life. He just never seems to get down. I am often amazed at how he has the ability to handle adversity and, more often than not, put a humorous spin on the situation. John also has this attribute that he does not take himself too seriously. He is fun to be around and someone who always seems to be there for you if you need him. He is definitely not disabled.

In our family, when someone comes down with a "case of attitude" we say he/she "got ugly." I never really thought too much about that saying, but it is rather descriptive. If someone "gets ugly", they shut down and refuse to communicate. They often make everyone else around them gun-shy ... not wanting to be on the receiving end of the negativity.

I have been known to "get ugly" once or twice in my life. When that happens, I am not a happy camper. It is a shame that when I do "get ugly" that I am blinded from seeing what my attitude does to others. If I wallow in self-defeat and continually feel sorry for myself, what have I accomplished? Have I proven anything other than finding out that I am a person no one wants to spend time with? Am I any better off by continually venting and showing others what a butthead I am? And, most importantly, does my poor attitude change anything?

What is also interesting is that when I see someone else that I care for with a bad attitude, I want to find out what is wrong and help them through it. I want them to open up and tell me what is bothering them; hoping that we can talk it out. At the time, unfortunately, the person is usually not very receptive because he/she finds it easier to just shut down and wallow in the mire.

The other day I came across something that I wrote twenty-five years ago. Those were the early days when I had something to say, but was not sure how to say it. I have no idea what was going on in my life at the time, but this piece seems to fit perfectly with the topic.

Peace
It's been a long time since we walked together
Is it because I lost my way
I keep asking why you deserted me
when I need you the most these days

We were inseparable friends once
and then you went away
Am I so different now than I was then
or are you just waiting for me at the next river bend
 
Is this daily hell I go through
the penitence I must pay
I know this pain would all be forgotten
if you would just visit me again today


If you were at peace with yourself, it would be difficult to have a bad attitude.