Living with Kennedy’s Disease is not only difficult for the person with the condition, it also wears on the caregivers and other family members.  The stress caused by the progressive disorder can take its toll on everyone.  When this happens, we find ourselves tired and more irritable with no way to find relief.

We’ve all been there at one time or another when everything becomes effort and there is little joy in life.  That’s is when we need an attitude adjustment.  Saying it is easy.  The difficulty is in the doing.

I read an interesting article in the Human Active Outlook magazine the other day.  It was titled, “Switch off energy zappers and Switch on energy boosters” and was written by Kelly Traver and Amy Avery.


The article had some good information on how to improve your overall energy. 
Eating the right foods and being conscious of what and when you are eating is a good first step.
Drinking plenty of non-sweetened beverages (e.g. water) helps because dehydration makes you feel tired.
Get eight hours of sleep every night to release stress and renew your energy.
develop regular bedtime habits.
Don’t watch TV in bed.
Make your room comfortable, slightly cool and dark.
Find activities that are stimulating and fun.  Participate in activities that you enjoy being around.
Exercise helps your brain produce feel-good chemicals that help bring up your energy and improve your mood.
Takeaway some of your daily routines.
Remove some of your daily responsibilities by either delegating them or spreading them out to every other day.
Schedule time for yourself.  Do something you enjoy and it will help renew your energy and attitude.
Don’t fan the flames.  Inflamed cells within the body can cause fatigue. 
Inflamed cells are damaged, swollen or weakened due to stress. 
This inflammation is behind almost every chronic disease including heart disease, cancer and arthritis.


The article also provided tips for anyone, including caregivers, on how to get (and stay) energized.  Yes, several items mentioned are included in the list above.
Think about your own life and goals.  Focusing on other things that are important can re-energize you.
Count your blessings.  Take note of things and people that are good in your life.  Record them in a gratitude journal or make it part of your daily prayer or meditation.
Find ways to manage stress, exercise daily, and get a good night’s rest.
Learn to accept things that you cannot change.  This can be difficult (especially when dealing with a progressive disorder), and it might take some time to change your way of thinking.  Dwelling on things you have no control over can cause stress and zap your energy.  Instead, put that energy into things that make you happy.
Surround yourself with loving, positive friends.  Your body and brain will respond in a physical way by producing natural chemicals that make you happy.
Laugh every day.  Laughter is the best medicine.  “Research shows that happy, optimistic people are healthier, recover more quickly, have fewer health complications, and live longer,” explains Betsy Nota-Kirby, Director of Wellness at LifeSynch.
The last section was titled “Turbo Boost It” and it provided the two best, cheapest, and easiest ways to boost your energy, reduce stress and ease a variety of symptoms.
Exercise
Sleep
  That’s right (#3 above), exercise regularly and  get
your sleep.  “Both work on your body and your brain to make you as healthy as possible.”