The dictionary defines "discipline" as: the act of denying yourself; controlling your impulses.

And, "obsession" is defined as: a compulsive preoccupation with something.

There is a saying, "Use it or lose it!" It has been over eleven months since I started my new exercise program. Because of my discipline (obsession?), I have exercised every day but one (Christmas). The reason I continue to exercise every day is because the exercise program works. I am now using weights for all of the arm and shoulder exercises (and increased weights for a couple exercises). Leg exercises have become so easy that I increased the number of reps and the actual hold time to a point where I become a little bored counting. This is all good news and probably explains my obsession (I mean discipline) with exercise.

I can also say that my legs are stronger today than one year ago. If the documentation is correct about those of us with Kennedy's Disease, then, on average, we lose about two percent (2%) of our strength each year. If that is the case, I reversed the downward trend at least for this year. If that 2% a year number were correct, that would mean that my strength should have declined by about 70% (it has been 35 years since onset). There are times that I feel that way, but as a whole, I do not take much credence in averages. I guess the only sure way to know would be to have been tested every year using the same exercise program. On the other hand, what does it matter? No two people with the defect decline at the same rate. Perhaps it is important for the scientific community or for doctors to help explain the degradation. If I would have thought 35 years ago that I would be in this condition today, I would have been more worried.

As I mentioned in my two articles on exercising, I just enjoy exercising. It is something that I have done most of my life. It makes me feel good (endorphins) as well as breathe better. And, I can see results. So, whether it is a quality (discipline) or a compulsion (obsession), what does it really matter as long as it feels good and does no harm?

Next, you will be questioning why I go through a pack of handy-wipes every day (just kidding).