Because I spend several hours a week in front of the PC and my fingers do not always type what I meant for them to type, I have been looking at speech recognition software. This finger control problem happens most often during the winter months, but it can happen at any time. I am not a hunt-n-peck typist. Yes, I do occasionally sneak a peek, but most of the time I just type away without thinking about it. One habit I have never broken, unfortunately, is that I correct on the fly. In other words, I stop and correct mistakes that I see while typing. Occasionally, this habit causes me to lose my train of thought. Bummer!

I tried speech recognition software a few years ago. I went the "cheap route," however, and it did not work. I kept on hearing about a software program that was quite good, but did not want to come up with the bucks to try it (just in case it did not work). I uninstalled the "cheap" program and forgot about it. I heard that Vista had a decent speech recognition program and that Windows 7 software is far superior. I am not ready upgrade to Windows 7 yet because XP Pro still works fine for me.

Late last fall, I read this blog post about speech recognition software and watched the video. I was once again interested. I have gone back to the blogs a couple of times to read the comments posted. Some of these were quite interesting and helpful. I am still concerned about my pronunciations and nasally voice (I never thought I had one until I listened to myself on a recorder). Will the software recognize my speech peculiarities enough to make it worthwhile (not have to spend hours editing)? I understand that "training the software" is important to make it more accurate. If I could get to 95%+ accuracy, it would be better than typing and could be a whole lot faster.

One of the points made in the video is that you need a high-quality headset and sound pod to achieve the greatest accuracy. When I add the price of these two items to the software's price, I once again hesitated (is that procrastination or just being cheap). If it would work, it would be worth it. I am just concerned that I would not like the results and would not use it.

Have any of you had any experience with speech recognition software? I would be interested in your thoughts.


 

 