Flu season is upon us again. As most of us with Kennedy's Disease know, the flu can be detrimental to our health. Our lungs, especially as we get older, are often not strong enough to clear the phlegm.  If we get pneumonia, things can get serious.

I encourage anyone with Kennedy's Disease to have the annual flu shot. And, if you have not had a pneumonia vaccination, or if it has been more than five years since the last vaccination, I highly recommend that you have that shot or the booster, if needed (more on the vaccination). If you are on Social Security or a member of the MDA, the vaccinations are free.

I continue to hear that we do not need to be concerned about the swine flu. I have discussed this with my doctor and the pharmacist. Both feel that my immune system (because I am more mature … old, in other words) has probably built up a resistance to this type of flu. The CDC reports that most deaths from the HiNi (swine) flu result because the person develops a secondary infection (pneumonia). In other words, having the pneumonia vaccination might help those who do come down with the swine flu (more on this).

I also have a couple of other recommendations that I would like to share with you today. Both are lung exercises that will help build up lung capacity and help provide the lung strength to clear phlegm should you ever come down with the flu.

The Sniff Exercise: Anytime you think about it, take a deep breath through your nostrils. You should be able to see your stomach expand outward (the diaphragm is expanding). Take three or four good sniffs and exhale slowly after each one. This is a simple exercise that helps build and maintain your lung capacity.  
The Cough Exercise: Take a deep breath and then cough. Make sure it is a loud, forceful cough. Cough three or four times. This is another simple exercise that helps build lung strength. 
Note: You should practice both of these exercises every day.

One other bit of advice is that I have found Mucinex Expectorant (tablets) to be excellent in helping to clear phlegm from the lungs. A few years ago, I came down with pneumonia. My doctor recommended Mucinex (it is an over-the-counter product) and I found it to be very helpful in cleaning out my lungs. As always, check with your doctor before taking any medications (even if they are over-the-counter).

I would be remiss if I also did not mention to keep your hands washed and do not rub your eyes (this is advice from my mother and now my wife). Unfortunately, I always have difficulty following this advice.

As Benjamin Franklin said, "An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure." Annual vaccinations and a few sniffs and coughs will help keep you healthy and your lungs strong.