Lamosyn is an Indian brand name of generic anti-epileptic lamotrigine. In addition to epilepsy, it is also prescribed for mental health problems such as bipolar affective disorder. Skin rash is the most significant side effect. In addition, this medication can cause nausea, dry mouth and unsteady walking.

Lamosyn 25mg tablets

Uses of Lamosyn

This medication is classified as an anti-epileptic. But it was found that this medication is also effective in psychiatric disorders such as Bipolar affective disorder. It is prescribed to prevent bipolar depressive episodes in patients who are in predominantly depressive phase.

25mg and 50mg tablets

Use in neurology

This medication is used in most types of epilepsies. It is used in focal and generalized seizures. In addition, it is used in Lennox – Gastaut syndrome. It is also used in typical absence seizures in children.

Use in psychiatry

 Bipolar depression is depressive phase in patients with bipolar affective disorders. Bipolar affective disorder is characterized by different phases of mood and activity. In manic phase patients have extremely elevated mood, increased energy and disruption in social function. In depressive phase, patients get exact opposite of manic phase. They get low mood, suicidal ideation, low energy and feeling of worthlessness.

Compared to major depressive disorder, depression associated with bipolar disease is challenging to treat. It is because most antidepressants do not work in bipolar depression.

Lamosyn is one of the medications that is proven to be effective in preventing depressive episodes in bipolar illness.
What are the common side effects?

Commonest side effects of this medication are nausea and vomiting. To minimize these side effects, you need to take it with a full glass of water without crushing the medication. In addition, taking this medication after a meal will reduce the stomach side effects.

Other common side effects list

Dry mouth
Dizziness
Tremors
Poor sleep
Vision problems
Rash


Skin rash is the most problematic common side effect. It can occur in 1% of individuals who take this medication. If you develop any skin problem while on Lamosyn, then stop the medication immediately and consult your doctor. Skin reactions can go into life threatening conditions. This is one reason doctors start this medication very slowly.

Skin rash that occur in 1% of patients. Courtesy : http://www.newhealthguide.org

Rare side effects of Lamosyn

Inflammation of eye
Liver failure
Unsteadiness in walking
Confusion
Hallucinations
Blood problems


Dose and administration

This medication starts with 25mg once daily for 14 days then 50mg daily for another two weeks usually up to maximum dose of 600mg per day with two weekly dose increments. Very slow increase of dose is required to prevent the rash from developing.

Pregnancy

This medication can harm the unborn child. But the discontinuation of medication in pregnancy can result in aggravation of epilepsy or bipolar depression (which may have more risk of harm to mother as well as to the baby). Therefore, continuation or discontinuation of this medication should be done by an experienced clinician.

Breast feeding

Lamosyn occur in breast milk. Again the decision to stop medication should be done by an experienced clinician.

It is very important that you should consult your doctor before planning to get pregnant and you need to use contraception to prevent unexpected pregnancies.

Summary

Lamosyn is prescribed for epilepsy and bipolar depression. Most troublesome side effect is the skin rash. In addition, it should be cautiously used in pregnancy and breast feeding under super vision of an experienced clinician.