Sonata is a prescription only medication used for short term relief of insomnia. Its generic name is Zaleplon. This drug is quite useful for initiation of sleep. However, it is not helpful in maintaining sleep and it usually does not prevent frequent nighttime awakenings.


 Similar to benzodiazepines, Sonata Modulate GABA Type A receptors in the brain and increase their action. This action increases the inhibitory neuro transmission and it ultimately relieves insomnia.


 What the doctor should know before prescribing Sonata?
 If the patient has kidney disease, liver disease, breathing disorder, clinical depression, ataxia (poor control of body movements), or myasthenia gravis then he/she should discuss that with the doctor before taking Sonata. In addition, the doctor should know what the over the counter medications patient is on.


  The doctor may not prescribe this medication to pregnant and nursing mothers. Problematic effects to the new born are reported in regular use, especially in the last three months of the pregnancy.


In addition, this drug increases adverse effects of alcohol and other recreational drugs. Therefore the doctor should know the patients sober habits, before prescribing Sonata.


What should the patient know before taking Sonata?


This medication is available as tablets. Tablets should be taken with full glass of water without crushing, to minimize side effects. It can be taken with or without meals. This is a very short acting drug. Therefore patients should take this medication immediately before sleep.


What are the common side effects?


 If taken in the night drowsiness is usually not continued to the next day. However, operating machinery and driving motor vehicles are not recommended in the following day. 


 Other common side effects are numbness in extremities and menstrual pain. Reduced muscle strength and co-ordination problems of movements are side effects as well. In addition, people can get poor mental concentration, restlessness, confusion and memory loss with this drug.


In addition, one of the main problems associated with Sonata is dependence and withdrawal symptoms like rebound insomnia and fits. Dependence and withdrawal means getting adverse effects when the drug is stopped. However, unlike other hypnotics, tolerance is not reported with regular use. In addition, tolerance means requiring increased amount of the drug to achieve the same benefit.





What are the relatively rare side effects?


 Rarely few patients can get gastro intestinal effects such as nausea and vomiting. In addition, certain patients may get respiratory depression.


 Sometimes patients can get hallucinations. Some patients may get depressed with this medication. Therefore, if a patient is having feelings of worthlessness, suicidal ideas or sad mood after taking this drug, he/she must see a doctor. In addition, complex sleep related behaviors such as sleep driving, making phone calls or eating food has been reported very rarely.


 Disturbance of smell is another side effect some patients may experience. Hearing and speech disturbances are also reported with some patients. Allergic reactions to this medication can occur rarely. These include hives, itchiness and shortness of breath.


Summary


Sonata is a medication prescribed for short term relief of insomnia. Most common side effects are numbness, and drowsiness.


Sources
British National Formulary