Encorate is a brand of Sodium Valproate manufactured by Sun pharmaceuticals India. Encorate chrono is long acting preparation that can be given once daily. It is prescribed for epilepsy, migraine and bipolar disorder. Main side effects are nausea, weight gain and hair loss with curly regrowth.


What are the uses of Encorate ?


Primary use of this medication is for epilepsy. In addition, recently it has been licensed in bipolar affective disorder. In addition, it is used for people with migraine to prevent further attacks.
Encorate is prescribed for all major forms of epilepsy. In fact it is one of the most prescribed anti-epileptic.
Encorate 200mg tablets



Use in Bipolar disorder


In addition to epilepsy, Encorate is prescribed for people with bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorder is characterized by episodes of depression and mania. These patients at times get depressed and at times they get manic. In the manic phase patients experience extreme elevation of mood, increased energy, and reduced need to sleep. In mild form of the disorder, they tend to work more, get more sexual desire and spend more money. Most of the time spending excessive money and sexual disinhibitions can cause serious social harm. When the manic phase is serious, the patients would become irritable, violent and start getting psychotic experiences. They become destructive and need to be treated in a secure psychiatric facility.
Bipolar disorder - Mania and depression in same person 


At the other extreme, same patient can develop depressive episodes. Depressive episode is characterized by Low mood, lack of energy, and getting lack of pleasure from previously enjoyable activities.


Encorate is used to prevent severity of episodes, therefore classified as a mood stabilizer. It is prescribed for patients with serious or frequent episodes (more than two within five years).


Side effects of Encorate


Most common side effects


Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea are the most common side effects. In addition, hair loss with curly regrowth can occur. Ankle edema and obesity can be troublesome side effects. In addition, some patients may experience tremors of limbs.
                                     Serious side effects that can rarely occur with Encorate


1.    Liver dysfunction
2.    Increased ammonia in the blood
3.    Blood disorders
4.    Pancreatitis
5.    Allergic reactions


Encorate should not be given to pregnant women(Especially at the early pregnancy). It is documented to cause harm to the unborn baby. Therefore, always tell the last menstrual period to the doctor and whether you are pregnant to the doctor.

Should avoid in Early pregnancy



If you are on Encorate, then make sure you use adequate contraception and plan the pregnancies after discussing with your doctor.


In addition, if you have liver disease, you should inform that  to the doctor before he/she prescribe this medication.


Different formulations of Encorate

Encorate is available as tablets, syrups and long acting preparation. Generally it is prescribed twice or thrice per day. 

What is Encorate Chrono ?

Encorate chrono is a long acting preparation of Sodium Valproate. Unlike normal preparation, it causes fewer short term side effects such as Nausea. In addition, it can be prescribed once daily, compared to twice or thrice daily prescription of its normal sibling. However, it is more expensive than the normal preparation. 

Encorate chrono - Long acting preparation
When you are taking this medication, make sure you do not crush or break tablets. It will reduce the effectiveness and cause more side effects. In addition, take this medication with meals and with a full glass of water.


Summary


Encorate is a anti epileptic medication that is also used in bipolar disorder and migraine prophylaxis. It can cause liver failure and should not be taken by pregnant mothers. 