Manorest is a trade name of the generic medication Alprazolam. It is manufactured in India and popular in Indian sub-continent. It is prescribed for Anxiety disorders and to help sleep problems. This medication is known to cause fatigue, drowsiness and dizziness. This medication should not be used in long term as it is habit forming and causes addiction.


Uses of Manorest


Manorest is prescribed primarily in anxiety disorders such as social phobia, simple phobia, agoraphobia and panic disorder. Addition to above use this medication can help to reduce seizures. But it is rarely used for this purpose.


This medication should not be used long term, by people with anxiety disorders, as they will need higher doses to control anxiety. In addition, they become more anxious when they are not on medication.

Sudden discontinuation of Manorest after prolonged use can cause severe withdrawal syndrome. It is similar to alcohol withdrawal reaction and should be treated by medical professionals.
Manorest 0.5mg tablets


What are the dose range of Manorest?


This medication is usually prescribed in the range 0.25mg to 1mg. It should be taken as a complete tablet with full glass of water. Never crush the tablet before taking as it will increase the side effects.


What are the common side effects of this medication?


Drowsiness is a commons side effect of Manorest
Most common side effects are sedation, dizziness and drowsiness. These side effects can go on to next day morning, when you takes the medication at night (It is prescribed at night). Therefore it is very important you should avoid operating machinery and driving vehicles, when you are on Manorest. However, after sometime you may find the side effects become tolerable.


Operating machinery can be dangerous if you took this medication at night



Driving can be dangerous if you are on Manorest



If this medication is taken to induce sleep, you may find the quality of sleep is less than the natural sleep. It is because this medication is known to disrupt natural sleep cycle.


Few people have reported that taking this medication can cause depression and suicide tendencies. In addition, some people will lose their social inhibition and can become irritable and aggressive. In addition, it can increase risk taking behavior in certain individuals.


Other common side effects are memory impairment, confusion, and fatigue. Confusion is more common among elderly people who take this medication.


List of commons side effects of Manorest


1.       Sedation
2.       Drowsiness
3.       Dizziness
4.       Loss of quality sleep
5.       Depression
6.       Disinhibition
7.       Aggression
8.       Memory impairment
9.       Confusion
10.    Fatigue

Clinical depression is a common side effect



Rare side effects of Manorest


1.       Sexual problems
2.       Allergic reactions
3.       Headache
4.       Walking difficulty
5.       Urine incontinence


Information you need to give to your doctor before getting your prescription


1.       Kidney disease
2.       Pregnancy status
3.       Breast feeding
4.       Liver disease
5.       Breathing problem such as Asthma
6.       Clinical depression
7.       Myasthenia gravis
  Summary

Manorest is a prescription only benzodiazepine class medication, its generic name is Alprazolam. It is prescribed for Anxiety disorders and to induce sleep. Its main side effects are sedation, drowsiness, confusion and memory impairment. 

Sources

Drug treatment for anxiety - Australian prescriber