Nodict is a brand of generic Naltrexone manufactured by Sun Rise Pharmaceuticals, India. It is prescribed for Alcohol and Opioid (Heroin and Morphine) dependence. This medication is one of modern treatment methods used by doctors to treat substance dependence.


How Nodict is used?


This medication is used as a relapse prevention method in Alcohol dependence. Once alcohol withdrawal is treated by a specialist, it is important to prevent any potential reverting back to drinking behavior.


Nodict Tablets



When Nodict is taken, person would not get the same enjoyment as before. Therefore, motivation to continue abstinence increases. In addition, it prevents the person from going back to alcohol taking behavior when he sees related stimuli e.g. Sight of a bar, meeting friends who are used to drinking with him/her.



Nodict can be used to treat Heroin use



However, it cannot prevent an unmotivated person from drinking alcohol. It just helps to prevent alcohol taking behavior in a well-motivated individual. So motivation is the key to achieve abstinence.


Same principals apply to person with opioid dependence. A person who tries to take Opioids while on Nodict would need higher doses to achieve same effects and it could result in serious over dose (could be fatal) of Opioids (Heroin or Morphine).


Courtesy : Pixabay



It is important to note that this medication is successful in people who are already motivated to stop the substance, but could not do it due to long term changes in their brains. In addition, to be successful this medication should be taken as a part of comprehensive treatment plan including psychological and social problem management.


How Nodict is taken


It is available as 25mg and 50mg oral tablets. Usually in the first day 25mg is taken then the dose is increased to 50mg. It should be stopped once the person relapsed (started taking alcohol despite on Nodict) or the person is able to completely get rid of alcohol taking behavior (which should be determined by a professional).


To minimize side effects it should be taken orally with a full glass of water without crushing the tablet. It should be stopped, once the individual starts taking the intended substance while taking this medication. 

For people who take heroin and opioids, this medication should be taken only when the substance is completely got off from their body. Otherwise they will experience exaggerated withdrawal reaction. 

It should be taken at least six months after achieving abstinence. After six months medication can be stopped.  

How this medication acts?
This medication blocks the opioid receptors in the brain including opioids produced by our own body (endorphins). Opioids produced by our own brain plays a part in alcohol dependence, while heroin and morphine abuse directly causes pleasure and dependence. This medication helps to attain abstinence by way of stopping these substance from acting on the brain. 

People with following problems would not able to take this medication


1.       Severe liver damage
2.       Severe kidney damage
3.       People who do not motivated to stop substance and already on them.
4.       Breast feeding women
5.       Pregnant women


Side effects of Nodict


Following side effects are most common. They are Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, reduced appetite, increased thirst and sleep problems. Some people may complain headache, increased anxiety, mood swings, delayed ejaculation and increased tears and increased sweating.


Most common side effects in a list


1.       Nausea
2.       Abdominal pain
3.       Diarrhea
4.       Loss of appetite
5.       Sleep problems
6.       Headache
7.       Increased anxiety
8.       Mood swings
9.       Delayed ejaculation
10.   Tearfulness
11.   Increased sweating


Summary


Nodict is a brand of Naltrexone that is used in Opioids and alcohol dependence. It should be prescribed by a professional as part of comprehensive treatment plan. Main side effects are nausea  loss appetite, and headache.
 
Evidence 

1. Naltrexone (Nodict) in the Treatment of Alcohol Dependence