Addwize is an Indian brand name of Methyl-Phenidate. It is a drug prescribed by doctors for ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder) in both adults and children. It is classified under central nervous system stimulant. This medication has serious abuse potential, therefore, it is a controlled drug.

What is ADHD?

ADHD or attention deficit hyperactive disorder is characterized by restlessness, inattentiveness and impulsive behavior. Children affected by this disorder are at risk of developing severe learning difficulties, behavioral problems, social problems, substance abuse issues and criminality.


ADHD

Children with ADHD has inability to concentrate matter at hand

How to diagnose and treat ADHD

Uses of Addwize

This medication can control short term hyperactive behavior and improve attention. This was proven beyond doubt by numerous clinical trials. However, it does not improve ADHD on long term. It should be used when the person need most attention. E.g A child who is studying at school. Once the medication effects are gone, symptoms of ADHD come back. Usually medication effect lasts for about five hours. For children it should be given in the morning just before the child starts school work. Sometimes a afternoon dose may be needed.




What are the problems associated with Addwize?

Addwize is a frequently prescribed medication for people with ADHD.
Most common long term side effect in children that worries the parents is weight loss. This is due to prolonged loss of appetite. In addition, this drug is also known to cause stunting.

Some patients can get nervous with this medication. In addition, some patients may complain lack of sleep. Certain patients may complain muscle tightness, abnormal movements and restlessness.

Other common side effects are nausea, vomiting and stomach pain. Some patients develop skin rashes. Certain patients may complain dry mouth.

What are the serious side effects?

Some people can have dangerously high blood pressure with this medication. So if a patient complains of severe headache, blurred vision, buzzing in ears, chest pain and shortness of breath then you must get the patient to an emergency department.

Medical help should be sought if you notice any abnormal behavior or seizures.
If the patient develops widespread hives, tightening chest pain, edema of the lips and face and shortness of breath, then you must take this patient to a hospital. It can be due to a serious allergic reaction called anaphylactic reaction.

Rarely some patients may experience low blood pressure. Symptoms are faintish ness and lightheadedness.  If a patient falls frequently while on Addwize then you must consult your doctor.

Some patients may get fast, pounding and uneven heartbeats (arrhythmias). Certain patients may complain tremors, restlessness, and motor tics. These side effects must be reported to your consulting doctor.

If a patient complains abnormal perceptions, abnormally elevated mood or any other abnormal behavior then he/she must be seen by a doctor.

What the doctor should know before prescribing Addwize?

Prescribing doctor must know all the drugs patient is currently on including over the counter drugs. If your patient has following problems inform your doctor before he writes the prescription.

1.     Any heart disease
2.     Kidney disease
3.     Epilepsy
4.     Liver disorders
5.     Tic disorder
6.     Tourette's syndrome

What you should know about Addwize?

This drug has some serious abuse potential. So keep this medication in a safe place. Use it only in prescribed dosage. Never share this medication with anybody else.

But it is advisable to take meals before the drug, due to loss of appetite. Take this medication in the morning. Taking this drug in the evening can cause sleep problems. Keep this medication out of reach of children. 

Summary

This is a frequently prescribed medication for ADHD with proven efficacy. But it has some nasty side effects. But your doctor may have prescribed it for a reason, so do not stop it by yourself due to side effects. In addition this drug has a serious abuse potential, so never share it with anyone else.