Arip MT is an Indian brand of Antipsychotic Aripiprazole. It is an atypical antipsychotic medication prescribed in schizophrenia, psychoses and bipolar mania.

Other common brand name is Abilify. Most common side effects are nausea, vomiting and constipation. This drug reduces weight in some patients, unlike other common antipsychotics such as Olanzapine. It is a plus point in some patients who are obese. Compared to some other antipsychotics this medication is relatively safe for heart.

In addition, this medication is prescribed to patients who develop certain side effects such as increased body weight, increased blood sugar levels and increased blood lipid levels due to other antipsychotic medications.

Arip MT Tablets


Common dosage for this medication are 7.5mg, 15mg and 30mg. This medication is usually prescribed once daily. Compared to other antipsychotics this medication cause less drowsiness.

However, it can cause type of movement side effect called Akathisia. In akathisia, patient experience restlessness in their legs causing urgency to move. It can become a serious side effect to note as patients sometimes tend to commit suicide due to Akathisia. It can sometimes be missed by less experienced doctors as they may interpret the side effect as something to do with the illness. 

For resistant variety of Schizophrenia Sizopin is prescribed.


Another antipsychotic that is commonly prescribed

Uses and side effects of Sizodon

How it acts?

Schizophrenia and other psychoses are caused by problems in brain chemistry. Arip MT alters and corrects the brain chemistry so patient’s psychotic features disappear.

What the doctor should know before prescribing?

If the patient has depression, dementia, seizure disorder, liver disease, kidney disease, stroke and diabetes mellitus, then he/she must discuss with the doctor before taking this medication. The doctor should know whether the patient is pregnant or breast feeding.

What are the general advices?

This medication can be taken without regard to meals. This medication should not be shared with other people. Taking alcoholic beverages can increase certain side effects.

Do not change medication dose or stop taking medication on your own. If you get side effects or problems with this medication then consult your doctor. He/She will change the medication and dose.

What are the common side effects?

Gastrointestinal disturbances like nausea and vomiting are the most common. Increased heart rate is another side effect. Some patients may get sleep disturbances with this medication. Akathesia (inability to keep the feet in one place) can occur with Arip MT. Some patients can get tremors. Headache is another side effect. Blurred vision is also common.
Less commonly patients can get depressed with this medication. This medication can increase the suicidal risk of susceptible individuals.

What are the rare side effects?

Very rarely patients can get loss of appetite, difficulty in swallowing, hepatitis, yellowish discoloration of the body, edema, increased blood pressure and chest pain. Some patients may get agitated with this medication. Few patients may have anxiety, seizures, and reduced sodium levels in the blood and muscle pains. Certain patients may get urinary retention, incontinence, and sweating and hair loss. Very rarely some patients may report increased salivation, pancreatitis, laryngospasm and thromboembolism.

Summary


Arip MT is a medication prescribed for psychotic disorders such as Schizophrenia. Main side effects are nausea, akathisia and weigh loss. 