Lonazep is a brand of clonazepam manufactured by Sun pharmaceuticals, India. It is a benzodiazepine class medication prescribed for epilepsy, calm down disturbed patients, and induce sleep and to treat anxiety. Its main side effects are drowsiness, dizziness and unsteadiness or ataxia.


What are the uses of Lonazep?


Lonazep is mainly prescribed to treat epilepsy. It is effective in most types of epilepsies and it is usually prescribed in combination with other anti epileptic medications. It is also prescribed immediately to prevent further seizures when a seizure attack occurs.


In addition, it is prescribed for short term relief of insomnia (poor sleep). However, it should not be used for more than three weeks for the purpose of insomnia, as it is known to cause dependence (habit forming).


It is also used to treat alcohol dependence. In addition, it is helpful for people with poor sleep following discontinuation of alcohol. Medications like Zolfresh would also help people with sleep problems. 


Another brand of clonazepam that is commonly prescribed is Anxit. 


Summary of uses

1.       To induce sleep
2.       To calm down disturbed patients
3.       Epilepsy
4.       To relieve Alcohol withdrawal symptoms


Who should not use this medication?


Lonazep should be used carefully in patients with breathing difficulties. It is known to cause breathing difficulties, especially in higher doses. It should not be used in patients with myasthenia gravis.


In addition, it should not be used in patients with sleep apnea. Therefore, if you have poor sleep associated with snoring at night then you need to inform that to your doctor.

Lonazep should be used cautiously in patients with severe liver and kidney problems.
You should be cautious when you have following problems and inform them to the prescribing doctor.


1.       Breathing difficulties
2.       Snoring at night with poor sleep
3.       Kidney and liver problems



Lonazep 2mg tablets pack.


What are the common side effects of Lonazep?


Drowsiness and light headedness can go on to next day when it is taken in the night. In addition, it can cause unsteadiness or ataxia. It is also dangerous to operate machinery or drive vehicles when its effects are present.


Operating machinery can be dangerous when taking Lonazep tablets


In addition, some patients who were given Lonazep can become more agitated and it is called paradoxical excitation.


In addition, this medication is habit forming in long term use. People can become addicted to this medication and they may find that sleeping is becoming dependent on medication. It is common when this medication is taken more than three weeks.


Summary of common side effects

1.       Drowsiness
2.       Light headed ness
3.       Ataxia
4.       Danger of operating machinery and driving even in next day
5.       Habit forming
6.       Paradoxical excitation
  How do you take Lonazep?


This medication is taken as oral tablet. It should be taken without crushing or breaking. It should be taken with a full glass of water. Also it should be taken as prescribed by the doctor. Never adjust dose for yourself or use it for poor sleep for more than three weeks.

This medication is available as 1 - 2mg tablets. 
Lonazep mouth dissolving tablets
Mouth dissolving tablets are useful when the patient is violent and refusing medications. In such situations putting the tablets into the mouth causes rapid disintegration and patient cannot spit out the medication.

In addition,  they can be given in covert medication administration. Here the tablets are dissolved into a drink without patient’s knowledge. However, it has associated legal and ethical problems.
Lonazep mouth dissolving tablets


Summary


Lonazep is a benzodiazepine class medication prescribed for epilepsy, poor sleep and to calm down agitated patients. Its main side effect is drowsiness and difficulty in operating machinery and driving. In addition, this medication has abuse potential and can be habit forming. 