Petril ® is a clonazepam (benzodiazepine) brand manufactured in India. It is prescribed in epilepsy, anxiety disorders and in sleep problems. Most commonly reported side effects are drowsiness, dizziness, light headedness and problems in walking (ataxia).

In addition to the side effects mentioned above it has habit forming properties (Needing more dose to get the same effect especially sleep and getting unpleasant withdrawal symptoms when it is stopped) in long term use.

Petril 2mg tablets from MICRO pharma

Uses of Petril ®
This medication is used primarily to treat epilepsy. However, it is used in combination with other types of anti-epileptic medications. In psychiatry practice, it is used to calm down disturbed patients and to treat sleep problems.

In treating sleep problems, it is important to identify the cause for sleep problems and practice sleep hygiene techniques before getting pharmaceutical treatment.

Most common causes for sleep problems are psychiatry and medical problems. Common psychiatry problems are depression and anxiety disorders. Sleep problem settle once the underlying cause is treated.

Sleep hygiene techniques should be tried before taking this medication

Sleep hygiene techniques that could be tried before taking this medication
Use the bed only for sleep
Do not sleep in the day
Do not take alcohol, coffee, coke or chocolate (Caffeine) just before sleep
When you are unable to sleep then get up from the bed and do something else for some time
Try to make the sleeping environment comfortable, quiet and calm 
Overall exercise improves sleep, but try not to do vigorous exercise just before sleep
Dosage and how to take it

Petril ® is prescribed in 0.5mg to 4mg dose range. Most common dose is 1mg and 2mgs. It is taken at night therefore drowsiness would not interfere with day to day activities. Since this medication has long half-life (30 – 40 hrs), it is prescribed once a day.

To minimize side effects do not crush the medication. Take it with a meal and with a full glass of water. Do not exceed the dose prescribed by the doctor. Since it has abuse potential, do not take this without doctor’s prescription.

This medication should be taken long term with close medical supervision. It is because of its habit forming properties and quite severe withdrawal reaction.

Side effects of Petril ®
A list of common side effects
Drowsiness
Dizziness
Unsteady gait (walking)
Muscle weakness
It is very important that drowsiness and lightheadedness may persists into next day when you have taken this medication at night. Therefore, it is very important that you need to be very careful when driving or operating machinery.

IMPORTANT ! Operating machinery can become problematic when you are on this medication


IMPORTANT ! You should be careful when driving vehicles while on this medication
Uncommon side effects of Petril ® 
Headache
Vertigo
Slurred speech
Low blood pressure or hypotension
Tremors of hands and body
Urine incontinence and retention: - Common in elderly people
Rare side effects 
Respiratory depression: - It is important to tell whether you have respiratory problems such as Asthma, before getting the prescription. 
Blood disorders
Skin reactions
Paradoxical excitation: - Can cause disinhibition and increased activity in certain group of people.


What to tell your doctor before getting the prescription?
If you have following problems or medical condition, it is very important that you tell your doctor about them.
Liver disease
Kidney disease
Heart disease
Whether you are snoring in the night: - It is an indication that you have obstructive sleep apnea. When this medication is given in obstructive sleep apnea, it can result in dangerous lowering of respiration and blood oxygen levels in sleep that may result in brain damage. People with snoring complaint about poor sleep which make it a dangerous combination. 
Your work and occupation
Any medications you are on including street drugs
Whether you are pregnant or breast feeding

Snoring due to sleep apnea can cause sleep problems and prescribing sleep inducing medications in them can cause serious problems. 

Summary
Petril ® is a benzodiazepine class medication and its generic name is clonazepam. It is prescribed for epilepsy and in sleep problems. Main problems associated with this medication are drowsiness, lightheadedness and habit forming properties. This medication should not be a long term solution for sleep problems.

Pictures  Courtesy : Wikimedia