Flutinol is a brand of fluoxetine prescribed for clinical depression and anxiety disorders. It is an SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) class medication manufactured by Sun pharmaceuticals, India. Its main side effects are nausea, insomnia, sexual dysfunction and headache.


Uses of Flutinol

This medication is prescribed for major depression, anxiety disorders, bipolar depression and obsessive compulsive disorders.

Depressive disorder is characterized by persistent low mood, difficulty in doing everyday tasks and work due to lack of energy and unable experience pleasure. In addition, depressed people frequently get suicidal ideas and get ideas of hopelessness and worthlessness.

Flutinol is commonly prescribed for depression


This medication is effective for both major depressive disorder and bipolar depression. Bipolar depression is characterized by having episodes of mania (opposite of depression which is disruptive) interspersed with depressive episodes.

Flutinol is given in combination with Olanzapine (Oleanz) to treat bipolar depression. Otherwise (when given alone) there is risk of shifting to manic phase.

In addition to treating depressive disorders, this medication is effective in treating wide variety of anxiety disorders. These include panic disorder characterized by sudden out of the blue attacks of anxiety. In addition, this medication is used for generalized anxiety disorder characterized by prevailing anxious mood with worrying thoughts.

In addition, this medication is prescribed for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). It is usually given in higher doses in OCD.

Other indications are premature ejaculation, premenstrual syndrome and reduce sexual drive in people with abnormal sexual preferences (paraphilia).

Side effects of Flutinol
Commonest side effects are listed here

Nausea
Vomiting
Headache
Mania
Poor sleep
Sexual dysfunction: - Characterized as erectile dysfunction in men and reduced sexual desire in both women and men.  However, since depression can also cause sexual dysfunction net effect may be increased sexual function. 
Tremors
Gastric irritation and heart burn
Increased anxiety at the beginning of the treatment, which usually wanes after some time. 



Uncommon side effects
Aggrevation of psychosis
Bleeding problems
Reduction in blood sodium level
Serotonin syndrome


How is it prescribed?

Flutinol is available as capsules. Usual dose is 20mg per day. It is given in the morning to prevent interference with sleep. It should be taken fully without crushing the capsule outer coating. In addition, it should be taken with full glass of water and preferably after a meal. Taking it after a meal will reduce the side effects.

For obsession and compulsive disorder, it is prescribed at higher doses sometimes reaching 80mg per day.

Withdrawal symptoms

This medication can cause withdrawal symptoms, if it is stopped suddenly after prolonged use. Common withdrawal symptoms are tiredness, increased lacrimation, rhinorrhea and increased anxiety.

Before you take Flutinol

As with every medication, there are precautions that you might need to take into consideration. Make sure your doctor has your detailed medical history, before starting you on this medication. It is especially important that you should tell your medical problems, other medications you are on and any street drugs you are on to your doctor.

You should inform your doctor, whether you are pregnant, planning to get pregnant or breast feeding. In addition, it is especially important to tell your doctor if you are on following drugs

Other antidepressants (MAOI class of medications, TCA and SSRI class medications)
St Johns wart

Conditions you need to inform your doctor before getting prescription


Allergic to SSRI or fluoxetine
Gastric bleeding
Liver problems
Kidney problems
Taking alcohol
Having a bleeding disorder


Summary
Flutinol is an Indian brand name of fluoxetine prescribed for depression and anxiety disorders. Most common side effects are nausea, headache and gastric discomfort.