Celepra is a common SSRI medication prescribed for depression, panic disorders and anxiety disorders. Main problematic side effects are sexual dysfunction and increased suicidal risk among youngsters. Celepra is a brand of Escitalopram sold in India.

How Celepra works?

Celepra acts by inhibiting serotonin reuptake pumps in certain neuronal synapses. This inhibition of serotonin reuptake increases the levels of serotonin. Then the increased serotonin initiates a cascade of reactions, which ultimately results in the therapeutic action. But increased serotonin levels in unfavorable areas in the brain can results in the side effects.

Celepra is most commonly prescribed in clinical depression. Depression is characterized by persistent low mood, lack of enjoyment in life, suicidal thoughts and lack of energy. However the patients must take this medication for more than two weeks to see an effect.

What the doctor should know before taking Celepra?

If you have following problems then you must discuss them with the doctor.

1. Liver problems
2. Kidney problems
3  Epileptic Seizures
4. Heart problems
5. Bipolar disorder

In addition you must tell your complete medical history to the doctor including all the over the counter medications, herbal drugs and recreational drugs you use.

What are the dangerous side effects?

Some patients can rarely get allergic to Celepra. They can have a condition called anaphylactic reaction characterized by wide spread hives, shortness of breath and chest tightness. If present, emergency medical treatment must be sought.

Rarely certain patients can develop a condition called neuroleptic malignant syndrome. It is characterized by sudden onset muscle rigidity, fever and loss of consciousness. Immediate medical attention should be sought.

Certain patients can see or hear things that do not exist with this drug. In addition seizures can occur rarely.

What are the interactions?

In addition Clexa can have dangerous interactions with certain drugs such as Theophylline and Aminophylline. They are common ingredients of over the counter cough syrups. So patient must inform their complete drug history to the prescribing doctor.  In addition, patients should not take alcohol containing beverages with Celepra, since it can elevate effects of the drug as well as alcohol.
Increased suicidal risk?

Even though this is an anti-depressant, this medication is known to increase suicidal risk in susceptible individuals.

Usually depressed people tend to have lack of energy. It prevents them from harming themselves. Celepra increases energy level in the patient before relieving depression. This may be the main cause for increased suicidal risk.

What are the less dangerous but common side effects?

Nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain and skin rashes are main side effects. Rarely certain patient can report short term anxiety and agitation. Insomnia is also another troublesome side effect. But it can be controlled by taking the medication in the morning. Sexual dysfunction such as impotence and lack of desire can occur with both male female patients.

Summary

Celepra is a SSRI medication with some side effects. However most people tolerate the side effects. Main problem associated with this drug is sexual dysfunction.