Restyl  is a brand of Alprazolam manufactured in India. It is used for anxiety disorders and to induce sleep. At smaller doses it reduces anxiety and cause less drowsiness. However, it can cause fatigue and dizziness. In addition, this medication can be habit forming on long term use.

Uses of Restyl

 Restyl is mainly used to control anxiety. It can be useful medication in anxiety disorders such as Panic disorder, Social phobia and phobias. In addition, this medication has a seizure control effect. But there are other medications that are more effective for this purpose. Some use this medication to help sleeping, But medications like Zolfresh or Nitrest would serve purpose better. 

However, long term use of this medication for anxiety can become troublesome as you will need higher doses to control same anxiety. In addition, sudden discontinuation of this medication after long term use (more than three months) can cause severe reaction that may need medical attention.

Restyl 0.5mg Tablets


Usual dose of Restyl

This medication is used in the doses of 0.25mg to 1mg to control anxiety. Higher doses in the range of more than 2mg can cause significant drowsiness.

Uses and side effects of Lonazep (Brand of Clonazepam)

Uses and side effects of Manorest (Another brand of Alprazolam)

Common side effects of this medication

As mentioned earlier this medication can cause drowsiness and sedation. These side effects can go into the next day morning if you have taken this medication for sleep. It can cause problems in operating machinery and driving.

 In addition, to above side effects using this medication frequently can cause sleep problems as Restyl is known to disrupt sleep architecture. Even though you are able to sleep with this medication, it does not produce natural sleep. So you may not be feeling refreshed after the sleep.

In addition, using this medication frequently can cause depression and sometime it can cause suicidal tendencies.

Some people may lose inhibitions after using this medication and may become aggressive or show increased risk taking behavior.

In addition to above problems this medication can cause fatigue, memory loss and confusion.

List of commons side effects of Restyl

1.       Nausea
2.       Drowsiness
3.       Problems in driving and operating machinery
4.       Depression with suicidal tendencies
5.       Fatigue
6.       Memory loss
7.       Confusion
8.       Disinhibition causing aggressiveness and increased risk taking behavior

List of rare side effects
1.       Sexual difficulties
2.       Headache
3.       Urinary incontinence
4.       Difficulties in walking

What the doctor should know before prescribing?

This medication is prescription only. Therefore, you need to consult a doctor and explains your problems before getting this medication. Before getting the prescription you need to inform the doctor if you have following problems.

 If the patient has following diseases they should tell it to the doctor before taking the drug.

* Kidney disease
* Liver disease
* Breathing disorder
* Ataxia (poor control of body movements)
* Clinical depression
* Myasthenia gravis

General guidelines when you take this medication

Take the medicine at around the same time(s) every day.
Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand.

Take Restyl exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it, or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Do not stop taking this without informing your doctor.

Summary

Restyl is a Indian brand of Alprazolam. Its main uses include anxiety and helping to sleep. Main side effects is drowsiness. It can become habit forming in long term use.

Even though the author of this article is a medical doctor, contents of this article are for information only. You should always consult your doctor, before starting or stopping any drug containing Alprazolam e.g. Restyl. In addition, medical information can change over time. Please ask your doctor for information on the latest studies.