Tranax is a prescription only drug in the benzodiazepine family. It is a brand of Alprazolam manufactured by Cipla pharmaceuticals, India. 

It is commonly prescribed by doctors to treat anxiety, phobias and panic disorders. In addition, some doctors prescribe this medication to alleviate sleep problems in certain patients.

Principal side effects of Tranax are drowsiness, tiredness and dizziness. One of the most important side effect of this medication is addiction. It can become habit forming and in certain individuals it can become a difficult to treat condition.

What are the common uses of this medication?

Panic disorder, Anxiety disorders and phobias are most common indications. It is effective in people who have social anxiety when they face social situations. 

Tranax 1mg tablets 
It is available as 1mg, 0.5mg and 0.25mg tablets.


What are the dangerous and problematic side effects?

One of the main problems with Tranax is dependence, withdrawal symptoms and tolerance. Dependence and withdrawal means getting adverse effects when the drug is stopped. These include sweating, muscle pains, apprehension and fits. Tolerance means requiring increased amount of the drug to achieve same benefit. This feature is also called habit formation.

Addiction is common side effect of Tranax


Allergic reactions to this medication can occur rarely and they can progress into an anaphylactic reaction. So be careful when a patient develops widespread hives, shortness of breath, chest tightness and pallor.

Some patients can become depressed and can get suicidal ideation. In addition, certain patients can get reduced inhibitions and may show increased risk taking behavior.

If taken during the night, drowsiness may continue to the next day. This side effect makes operating machinery and driving dangerous. In addition, taking alcohol with this medication can aggravate the problematic side effects of both alcohol and the drug.


Hangover in next day make operating machinery dangerous


What are the common but less dangerous side effects?

Fatigue and dizziness are quite common. In addition, certain patients may complain reduced muscle strength and co-ordination problems of movements. Other side effects are poor mental concentration, restlessness, confusion and memory loss.

What are the relatively rare side effects?

Rarely patients can get stomach upset including nausea and vomiting. In addition, certain patients may get breathing difficulty. Headache is another rare side effect. Rarely some patients may complain sexual problems with this medication. In addition, very rarely few patients may get urinary problems. Difficulty in speech can occur rarely in some patients.

What the doctor should know before prescribing?

 If the patient has following diseases, they should tell it to the doctor before taking the drug.
* Kidney disease
* Liver disease
* Breathing disorder
* Ataxia (poor control of body movements)
* Clinical depression
* Myasthenia gravis

Other than that, the doctor should know about over the counter medications you are on. If the you are pregnant, then the doctor may not prescribe this medication, especially in the last three months of the pregnancy. In addition, the doctor should know your sober habits before prescribing Tranax.

General advice

 This medication is available as tablets. Tablets should be taken with full glass of water without crushing, to minimize side effects. It can be taken with or without meals. Never share this medication with anybody else.

Finally let us see how this drug acts

Tranax Modulate GABA type A receptors in the brain and increases the inhibitory neurotransmission. This process alleviates anxiety and panic attacks. But the same action causes side effects such as drowsiness.

GABA Type A receptor, where tranax acts


Summary

Tranax or Xanax is a benzodiazepine class medication prescribed for anxiety disorders. Main side effects of this medication are drowsiness that may continue to the next day, increased risk of falls due to incoordination, problems in memory and drug dependence.