Zolax is a brand of sustained release Alprazolam manufactured in India. It is primarily prescribed for anxiety disorders and to induce sleep in insomnia. Side effects are drowsiness, fatigue and lightheadedness next day. This medication should not be used more than three to four weeks at a stretch due to its long term habit forming properties.

Zolax SR tablets


Uses of Zolax 

This medication is primarily prescribed for anxiety related mental health problems. Most common indications are short term use in social anxiety disorder, simple phobia and panic disorder. In addition to the use in anxiety disorders, this medication can be used to prevent seizures. However, it is rarely prescribed for this.

This medication can also prescribe in short term relief of sleep problems. However, before taking this medication, a cause for sleep problems should be found. Commonest cause for sleep problems is lack of sleep hygiene.


Anxit is another brand of Alprazolam

What is sleep hygiene

      Sleep hygiene is habits and practices that will promote quality sleep. Good sleep hygiene promotes quality sleep and it will help to reduce unnecessary medication use.

Following list is a simple guide for good sleep hygiene

Avoid napping or sleeping during the day
Avoid stimulants such as coffee, or tea before sleep
Avoid alcohol or smoking before sleep
Use bed only for sleep. Do not use bed for watching TV, reading books or any other task.
Regular exercises promote quality sleep
Avoid emotionally upsetting events before bed



This medication should not be discontinued suddenly after prolonged use. It should be gradually discontinued.

What is the dosage range for Zolax ?

This medication is usually prescribed within 0.5mg - 1.5mg per day. It should be taken with a full glass of water and it should not be crushed before use as it will increase the side effects.

Sustained released preparation is usually available as 0.5 mg, 1mg and 1.5mg tablets.

What are the most common side effects of Zolax ?

1.       Sedation and drowsiness: - Can goes to the next day
2.       Problems in operating machinery and driving even in the next day morning
3.       Lack of quality sleep
4.       Confusion
5.       Loss of memory
6.       Muscle weakness
7.       Abuse and dependency risk

This medication is habit forming and has dependency risk.


Operating machinery can be dangerous while on this medication

Driving under influence of this medication can cause problems

What you should inform before getting the prescription of this medication?

1.       Liver problems
2.       Kidney problems
3.       Heart problems
4.       Obstructive sleep apnea
5.       Respiratory disease
6.       Muscle problems including myasthenia gravis
7.       History of drug and alcohol abuse

If your sleep problem is due to Obstructive sleep apnea, it can cause serious complications. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs in obese individuals. In addition, snoring is a symptom of obstructive sleep apnea.  

What are the rare side effects of Zolax ?
1.       Headache
2.       Vertigo
3.       Dizziness
4.       Slurred speech
5.       Low blood pressure
6.       Difficulty in speech
7.       Tremors of the hands
8.       Increased breast size or gynecomastia
9.       Reduced breathing can occur, especially it is given intravenously


This medication is generally well tolerated for most of the time. However, elderly people will get more confused with this medication. Sometimes, certain people can become more aggressive and disinhibited while on this medication.

Summary

Zolax is a sustained released brand of Alprazolam manufactured in India. It is prescribed for anxiety disorders and sleep problems. Most common side effect is sedation and drowsiness. 