Serdep is a brand of prescription only, SSRI class Anti-depressant manufactured by Cipla pharmaceuticals, India. Its generic name is Sertraline. It is prescribed for major depression, and anxiety disorders such as panic disorder. Most common side effects reported by patients are nausea, gastric irritation, and reduced desire for sex. However, this medication is one of the safest antidepressants for patients with heart disease.


Serdep tablets

Uses of Serdep

This medication is primarily used for depressive disorder. It is effective in both moderate and severe depressive disorder. Depressive episodes are characterized by prolonged period of low mood, inability to feel pleasure and having low energy to do day to day tasks. Depression is usually diagnosed when above symptoms are present for more than two weeks.

In addition, this medication is prescribed for anxiety disorders such as panic disorder, social anxiety disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. It is also prescribed for Post-traumatic stress disorder.

Panic disorder is characterized by sudden out of the blue attacks of anxiety. It can occur without any precipitant cause. Usually you are diagnosed as having panic disorder when you have more than 4 attacks per month. These anxiety attacks are characterized by having increased heart rate, palpable heart rate, fear of dying, sweating, fear of going mad and chest pain.

OCD or obsessive compulsive disorder is characterized by repetitive, senseless, own thoughts or actions that are not pleasurable. e.g. repeated hand washing to remove "germs". 


This medication is commonly prescribed in depression


How Serdep is taken

It is usually available as tablet form and is available as 50mg and 100mg tablets. Doses can go up to maximum of 200mg per day. Doctors usually start at the dose of 50mg and then gradually increase the dose.

To minimize side effects, one should take this medication with full glass of water and should be taken without crushing the tablets. When it is taken after a meal, side effects are minimal.

This medication should be taken with a Glass of Water

Side effects
What are the common side effects ?
Most common side effect is nausea and heartburn. In addition, this can cause headache and sleep disturbances. Another annoying side effect is sexual dysfunction. However, conditions that are prescribed this medication also cause sexual dysfunction (depression cause lack of desire for sex). Since this medication treats depression, it can improve sexual function in certain people with depression.

In addition, patients with anxiety disorders may notice that their anxiety becomes aggravated at the start of treatment. However, it usually wanes after one to two weeks. Usually some doctors prescribe benzodiazepine medication such as Lonazep to cover the initial period of increased anxiety. 

Summary of common side effects
Nausea
Heartburn
Initial increased anxiety
Sexual dysfunction
Headache
Weight loss and appetite loss
Sleep difficulties


If you have following problems then you should mention them to your doctor before getting the prescription
Bipolar disorder
Stomach ulcers
Previous history of serious adverse effects to anti-depressants
Bleeding disorders
Liver and kidney problems
Heart problems
             People with bipolar disorder have chance of getting a manic episode with this medication. Therefore, when you are giving a history to the doctor, it is better you mentioned whether you had previous episodes of increased energy or increased well being that is out of character for you.

In addition, your doctor would get a full medical history from you. You need to tell him the medications you are on including street drugs and recreational substances.

What are the serious side effects of Serdep?
Serdep can cause increased serotonin neurotransmission in the brain. It can result in serious adverse effect called serotonin syndrome. It can become life threatening in certain people. Common symptoms that can be used to diagnose this syndrome is fever, tremors, muscle rigidity, confusion and excessive sweating.

This medication can also cause interference of platelet function leading to increased risk of bleeding. 
However, it is a rare side effect.

Another side effect worth mentioning is increased suicidal risk in teenagers. Therefore, it is risky to prescribe this medication for teenagers.

Summary of possible life threatening side effects?
Serotonin syndrome
Stomach bleeding
Bleeding problems
Causing mania in patients with bipolar disorder.
Increased suicidal risk in teenagers

Summary

Serdep is a SSRI class medication. It is prescribed for major depression and anxiety disorders. Even though it is safest SSRI in heart disease, it can cause serious side effects. Common side effects are nausea and heart burn.  