Nexito is an Indian brand name of Escitalopram. It is a SSRI (Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) class medication. Nexito is commonly prescribed for clinical depression, anxiety and panic disorders. In addition, it is effective for wide variety of disorders including premenopausal syndrome to premature ejaculation.

Uses of Nexito
This is primarily prescribed for clinical depression. In addition, it is prescribed for panic disorder. Depression is characterized by persisting (more than two weeks) low mood, lack of energy, and inability to feel happiness. Nexito is given in moderate to severe forms of depressive disorder and it is generally not recommended for mild depressive disorder. In addition, it is not recommended in normal bereavement and grief. 

Nexito 5mg tablets

Clinical Depression
Panic disorder

Nexito is also effective in treating anxiety disorders such as obsessive compulsive disorder and social phobia. It is specifically indicated in panic disorder. Panic disorder is characterized by attacks of sudden out of the blue episodes of severe anxiety. In social phobia the person feels extremely anxious in social situations which can cause marked functional impairment. 
In addition to main indications, Nexito is also used in wide variety of conditions. It is prescribed for male premature ejaculation when it is quite distressing. In addition, some doctors prescribe it for premenopausal syndrome, behavioural problems in dementia and chronic fatigue syndrome.

Side effects of Nexito
This medication is a SSRI class medication. Therefore all side effects of medications in this class apply to this medication. These are the common side effects of SSRI medications. 
Nausea
Heartburn
Diarrhea
Headache
Weight loss
Loss of appetite
Sexual dysfunction
Poor sleep
Sexual dysfunction is a common and annoying side effect of Nexito. 



In addition to above side effects, following side effects can occur rarely. 
Allergic reaction : Hives, edema of the lips and anaphylaxis
Increased anxiety at the beginning of treatment, which settles after sometime. 
Risk of mania: Other extreme of depression. Therefore, it is prescribed carefully in patients with Bipolar affective disorder
Reduced blood sodium level
Serotonin syndrome
Increased bleeding
In addition to above side effects Nexito specifically causes following side effects.
Reduced heart rate and heart problems
Yawning
Impaired concentration
Most of the side effects go off after some time. Most people will experience increased anxiety and tremulousness at the beginning of treatment but it usually go off. Therefore, most doctors prescribe low initial dose and increase the dose as time goes by. 
However, one of the troublesome side effect and that can cause treatment discontinuation is Sexual side effects. These side effects manifest as erectile dysfunction in males and lack of sexual desire in females. But when prescribed for depression, it should be noted that depression can itself cause sexual problems. Therefore, for some patients with depression, taking Nexito will improve sexual function. 
Even though this medication has certain side effects, it is generally well tolerated. 

Pregnancy and breast feeding

There were no documented birth defects in mother who take this medication during pregnancy. But the risk cannot be completely eliminated. However, having depression during pregnancy is more likely to cause  problems in new born (depression and anxiety in later life) due to various disruption in neurochemical pathways. Usually it is recommended to take this medication during pregnancy. 

In breastfeeding all of the SSRI medications including Nexito goes into breast milk. But scientists discovered that Oxat (paroxetine) is least secreted into breast milk. Therefore, during lactation Oxat (paroxetine)  is recommended by most psychiatrists. 
Nexito plus ® 
Nexito plus is combination of both nexito and clonazepam. It is combined as escitalopram 5mg with clonazepam 0.5mg. You can read more about Nexito plus from here. 

How Nexito is prescribed
Nexito is available as tablets. Usual dose range is 5mg to 20mg. It should be taken as a whole tablet without crushing as it will increase side effects. It should be taken after a meal to minimize side effects. 
When it is prescribed your doctor should know whether you have
Bipolar affective disorder
Liver problems
Kidney problems
Heart problems
Bleeding problems 
Chronic gastritis
Tranax ® is another medication that is usually prescribed with Nexito to prevent initial aggravation of anxiety. 

 
 Summary

Nexito is a SSRI class medication prescribed for depression, panic disorder and other anxiety disorders. Its most common side effect is heartburn, nausea and headache. Sexual dysfunction is the most annoyed side effect. However, compared to other antidepressants this medication is well tolerated among patients. 