Eliwel is brand name of Amitriptyline manufactured by Sun Pharma India.

It is used for moderate to severe depression and to treat pain, due to problems in nerves (neuropathic pain). Common side effects are drowsiness, dizziness, blurred vision, urinary retention and dry mouth. It is available as 10mg, 25mg, 75mg tablets. It is a medication in the family Tri Cyclic Antidepressants (TCA). 





Eliwel 10mg tablets

Uses of Eliwel

Eliwel is chiefly prescribed to treat depression, nerve pain and anxiety disorders. It is one of the older medications to treat depression. At smaller doses it is effective for pain caused by nerve problems. In addition, at higher doses it is an effective antidepressant. It is also used in children with bed wetting problems. Even though it causes more side effects than newer antidepressants, newer antidepressants are not more effective than Eliwel.

In addition, to causing suffering depression is known to cause heart problems. 
Please click following link to learn more about depression and heart problems such as heart attacks.


Relationship between depression and heart problems


Melancholia or depression 



What are the common doses?

Eliwel is prescribed in 10mg and 25mg at night for nerve pains. However, for depression its starting dose is 50mg and can be increased upto 200mg.

What are the most common side effects of Eliwel?

This medication can cause drowsiness. It can occur in the morning when it was taken at night. Operating machinery and driving motor vehicles can become hazardous with these side effects.

This medication can cause urinary retention. It is especially common among elderly men with prostrate problems.
In addition, this medication can cause problems with heart rhythm, and this can worsen existing heart diseases. These side effect cause low blood pressure and dizziness, especially getting up from bed (postural hypotension). A Doctor will do an electrocardiogram before stating Eliwel, to make sure you do not have existing cardiac abnormality.

Anxiety, dizziness, agitation, confusion, sleep disturbances, irritability, and tingling sensation of the hands can occur with Eliwel.

Some patients complain psychiatric problems like hallucinations, delusions, mania, and hypo mania (milder form of mania) with Eliwel.  In addition, rarely patients can develop seizures. Tremors similar to Parkinson disease can develop in small number of patients.

Few patients complain breast enlargement, abnormally secreting milk from the breasts, even in males. Usually these side effects occur after prolonged use of the drug. Some patients might complain or even stop the drug without doctor's advice due to sexual problems.

Weight gain and increased appetite is another common and troublesome side effect. But rarely patients complain reduced body weight and loss of appetite.


Serious problems with this medication

Doctors take extra precautions when prescribing Eliwel to patients with heart diseases, hyperthyroidism, epilepsy, and hepatic impairment. Since Eliwel blocks acetyl choline neurotransmission, patients with prostatic hypertrophy (enlargement in prostrate gland), chronic constipation, and increased intraocular pressure (increased eye pressure) must discuss their medical history with the prescribing doctor.

Patients with psychosis, bipolar affective disorder may find their condition is worsening with Eliwel. Patients with bipolar affective disorder may enter into the manic phase with TCAs like Amitriptylin.

Doctors will not use Eliwel for immediate recovery phase of the acute myocardial infarction or heart attack, during heart blocks, for manic phase in bipolar affective disorder, in acute porphyria and in severe liver diseases. Most of the side effects will become tolerable during treatment.

Pregnancy

Irritability of the newborn can occur, if taken during last three months of pregnancy.

Breast feeding

Amount in breast milk is too small, but drug manufacturers advice to avoid.

General guidance

If you are on this medication, then do not stop it suddenly without consulting the psychiatrist involved.

Before starting on Eliwel

1.     Tell your doctor your allergies
2.     Tell all your prescription and nonprescription medications including vitamins and street drugs.
3.     Tell your doctor whether you are pregnant or breast feeding
4.     Tell your doctor whether you had any heart problems.
5.     Tell your doctor whether you had any urinary/prostrate or eye problems.
6.     Tell your doctor whether you had any psychiatry illnesses treated before.
7.     Tell your doctor whether you had whether you have a medical illness that need long term medications

Summary

Eliwel is a brand of Amitriptyline manufactured by Sun Pharma, India. It is mainly used for treatment of Depression, children with bed weeting and pain associated with nerve damage. However, it can cause drowsiness, sedation, urinary retention and cardiac problems.

Disclaimer

Please note that this author does not have any affiliation to Sun Pharma, India or Eliwel. The only purpose for this article is to highlight the uses and side effects of this medication. Always see a doctor before starting any treatment.