Oxat is an Indian brand of SSRI (Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) medication paroxetine. It is prescribed for major depressive disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder and other anxiety disorders.

Oxat 20mg tablets


Unlike other anti-depressants it is especially prescribed for breastfeeding mothers due to low concentration of the medication in breast milk.

This medication has side effects common to SSRI class medications such as nausea, heartburn and headache.

Heartburn is a common side effect of this medication


In addition, compared to other SSRI medications, it can cause more fetal malformations. Therefore, this medication is not prescribed in pregnancy.


Therefore, breast feeding mothers should use appropriate contraception when using this medication. It is because, breast feeding period is one of the commonest periods a woman can get accidentally pregnant.

What are the uses of Oxat?

This medication is usually prescribed for major depressive disorder, panic disorder obsessive compulsive disorder and other anxiety disorders.

Major depression is characterized by persistent low mood, lack of energy to do day to day tasks, and lack of pleasure and enjoyment of previously pleasurable activities that is lasting for more than 2 weeks.
This medication prescribed frequently for depressed patiennts

  This medication commonly prescribed for Depression after childbirth.

Panic and other anxiety disorders are usually characterized by inappropriate anxiety (“a feeling of worry, nervousness, or unease, typically about an imminent event or something with an uncertain outcome.”) that can result in severe impairment in productivity of the affected person.


Panic disorder can be treated with Oxat


In addition, Oxat is effective in obsessive compulsive disorders (OCD). Obsessive compulsive disorder is characterized by inappropriately repetitive behavior which is senseless and resisted by the individual. e.g Washing hands repeatedly even though the person knows it is useless.

Repetitive, useless, actions that are not pleasurable are characteristic of OCD such as repetitive hand washing


As mentioned earlier Oxat is preferred antidepressant for breastfeeding mothers because this medication excreted minimally into breast milk.

Due to possible documented harmful effects on the developing fetus, it is not recommended to use in pregnancy.

These are the common side effects of Oxat
1.     Nausea
2.     Heartburn
3.     Headache
4.     Loss of appetite
5.     Sexual dysfunction
6.     Yawning
7.     Abnormal dreams
8.     Sleep problems
9.     Increased blood cholesterol

Nausea and vomiting can be common side effects


These are the rare side effects of this medication

1.     Heart problems
2.     Documented harm to the developing baby when the mother takes this medication.
3.     Initial aggravation of anxiety when it is prescribed for anxiety disorders. Therefore, doctors prescribe usually prescribe low doses at the initial period of illness. But this effect usually goes off after the body gets used to the medication.
4.     Allergic reactions including hives, itchiness and edema of lips.  
5.     Risk of getting mania (Opposite spectrum of depression where excessive energy, elevated self-esteem that can result in severe disruption in activities)
6.     Reduced sodium levels in the blood
7.     Can get increased risk of bleeding. A common side effect of SSRI medications.
8.     Serotonin syndrome


Usually most of the side effects go off after some time.

But side effects such as sexual dysfunction, may persist. It is characterized by erectile dysfunction in men and reduced sexual desire in females.

In addition, this medication can cause delayed ejaculation. Sometimes it can be used in patients with premature ejaculation.

Since depression can also cause sexual dysfunction, some men will experience elevated sexual activity when they get out of depression.

In anxiety disorders, at the initial period of treatment, this medication can cause elevated anxiety. This usually wanes over time.  

How Oxat is prescribed?

This medication is available as tablets. Usual dose range is 10mg – 40mg. Usually patients with obsessive compulsive disorder receives highest doses

This medication should be taken after a meal to minimize side effects.


What the doctor should know before prescribing this medication

1.     Whether you have bipolar affective disorder
2.     Liver problems
3.     Kidney problems
4.     Pregnancy status (should not be given in first three months of pregnancy)
5.     Having excessive bleeding problems
6.     Gastritis

"If you are a woman in reproductive age then this medication should be taken with adequate contraception to prevent exposure to baby. "

Summary


Oxat is a SSRI class medication prescribed for depression and anxiety disorders. Most common side effects are nausea, heart burn and sexual dysfunction. This medication should not be given for pregnant women, even though it is recommended for breast feeding mothers.