Zosert is a brand of Sertraline manufactured by the Sun Pharmaceuticals, India. It is a SSRI (Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) class medication. It is prescribed for major depression, Obsessive compulsive disorder and other anxiety disorders. Most common side effects are nausea, gastric irritation and reduction in sexual desire. In addition, Zosert is one of the safest SSRI medication for patients with com morbid heart disease.


Zosert 50mg tablets



Depression is associated with many physical problems. Recent study has identified prolonged depression can cause heart problems such as heart attacks. 

Depression can cause Heart problems 


Uses of Zosert
This medication is mainly used for depressive disorder. Depression is characterized by more than two weeks period of low energy, low mood and lack of pleasure (unable to get pleasure from previously pleasurable activities). Zosert is given to patients with moderate to severe depressive episodes. A person need to take the medication for at least 7 – 10 days to experience a response.
In addition, Zosert is prescribed for obsessive compulsive disorder, anxiety disorders such as panic disorder, social anxiety disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.
Depression is one of the  most common indication of Zosert


How Zosert is available and how should it be taken?
Zosert is available as tablets. Usually it is available as 25mg, 50mg and 100mg tablets. Maximum dose is 200mg. Maximum doses are tried for patients with obsessive compulsive disorder.
To minimize side effects, it should be taken fully without crushing after a meal. In addition, a full glass of water should be taken with it.


Another brand of Sertraline common in India
What are the common side effects associated with Zosert tablets?
One of the most common side effect is heart burn and nausea. It can be minimized by taking it after a meal. In addition, some people develop headache especially after several days. Paracetamol (Acetaminophen 1g for an adult) can be taken as a treatment for this side effect.
In addition, sleep disturbances are common with this medication. Some people will experience poor sleep and others may experience drowsiness. Depending on the type patient can adjust the dosage time. E.g if it causes drowsiness take the medication in the evening.


Other more side effect of concern is sexual dysfunction. It can manifest as lack of sexual desire or erectile dysfunction (Impotence). 


Summary of common side effects
1.       Nausea
2.       Heartburn
3.       Headache
4.       Sleep problems
5.       Sexual dysfunction
6.       Weight loss and loss of appetite
  What are the serious side effects associated with Zosert tablets?
Zosert increases serotonin neurotransmission in the brain. Therefore, it can rarely cause serotonin syndrome. It’s a life-threatening side effect associated with initiation, dose escalation and mixing serotonergic medications. Common symptoms of serotonin syndrome are fever, tremors, muscle rigidity, confusion, delirium, sweating and changes in blood pressure/ pulse rate. Patients with serotonin syndrome should be managed in an Intensive care unit.
In addition, this medication can cause bleeding due to interference with platelet function. It is significant in patients with bleeding disorders, but it is rare.


When Zosert is given to bipolar affective disorder, it can precipitate manic episode. It is a common problem as many patients with bipolar affective disorder presents to doctors in their depressive phase.


In addition, when this medication is given to patients with gastric ulcers, they can be aggravated and sometimes can cause serious bleeding.


There is also concern that SSRI class medications increase suicidal risk when given to teenagers. But the research findings are conflicting.


Summary of serious side effects of Zosert
1.       Serotonin syndrome
2.       Bleeding problems
3.       Aggravation of gastric ulcers
4.       Precipitation of manic symptoms
5.       Increased suicidal risk when given to teenagers
6.       SIADH – Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion. This can cause reduced serum Sodium level and it’s a cause for mental confusion.


Summary
Zosert is a SSRI class medication and its generic name is Sertraline. It’s mainly prescribed for major depression anxiety disorders. This is the most cardiac safe drug in SSRI class. Its main side effects are nausea, headache and heartburn. In addition, it can cause serotonin syndrome and can aggrevate gastric ulcers.
 