Nexito plus is a combination of escitalopram 5mg and 0.5mg clonazepam in a single tablet. It is effective against anxiety disorders and in depression with poor sleep. This combination is effective against panic disorder, where the patient’s anxiety symptoms usually get worse initially with SSRI (Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors).

In addition, this medication can be given to people who have sleep problems. It is because escitalopram alone will reduce sleep and clonazepam increases sleep. So the combination can balance out. However, side effects of both compounds occur with this medication.


Problems with Nexito plus

Since this medication has fixed combination, it is impossible to change a single medication. Therefore, during early treatment phase, this medication is not recommended. It is better to have both types of medications given as single tablets, so they can be changed individually.

In addition, some mental health professionals do not agree about continuing benzodiazepines for long time. It is due to habit forming potential of benzodiazepines (clonazepam in Nexito plus).
Escitalopram alone is usually prescribed for long duration. Therefore, this medication is not recommended for longer duration. In such patients pure Nexito will be the choice.

Advantages of Nexito plus

This medication has the advantage of having less SSRI side effects such as insomnia, tremors and agitation. It is especially useful for patients who are sensitive for such side effects. In addition, this combination simplifies medication schedule so people will have less tablets to swallow.

You can see the comprehensive account on Nexito (Pure escitalopram) here.

Anxit is medication prescribed for sudden anxiety attacks

Side effects of Nexito plus
Side effects are combination of both escitalopram and clonazepam. Compared to pure Nexito, Nexito plus causes less tremors, less sleep disturbances and less agitation.


Nausea
Vomiting
Headache
Weight loss
Loss of appetite
Sexual dysfunction
Sleep disturbances

Sexual dysfunction is common side effect of SSRI class medications


In addition to above side effects, this medication can have following side effects.


Increased risk of mania in patients with bipolar affective disorders. 
Reduced blood sodium level
Serotonin syndrome
Increased bleeding
Yawning
Impaired concentration


Due to the presence of clonazepam, this medication can cause drowsiness, dizziness, loss of memory and unsteady walking. In addition, there is danger in working next day after this medication is taken in the night. It is safe not to engage in driving or operate machinery in the next day until you know how this medication affects you.

Operating machinery can be dangerous when you are on this medication


It is also advisable not to take alcoholic beverages as this medication can increase intoxication and side effects of alcohol.

Due to the presence of clonazepam, this medication can become habit forming. In addition, if you suddenly discontinued this medication, then you may experience more withdrawal symptoms (agitation, poor sleep, increased anxiety).

Summary

Nexito plus is a mixture of escitalopram and clonazepam. It is useful in patients who are sensitive to side effects of SSRI medications. Side effects are nausea, dizziness and sexual dysfunction.