Hello

My name is Dr ____________.I came across your website after praying about getting healed from my depression. I agree with most of what you are saying, but I do believe there are many components to being depressed :
1) genetics
2) environment
3) relationship you’re in
4) NUTRITION is a huge component
5) spiritual warfare
6) stress, lack of sleep

I'm a Chiropractor who has suffered with on/off bouts of chronic anxiety, panic attacks and depression. 5 months ago it was like someone turned off the light switch, my thoughts went from being positive to negative. I started having panic attacks again, back in the ER 3 times, and back on meds ( Celexa and Lorazepam). Thank God for the meds at the time, that's how bad things get.

Have you ever heard of TRUE HOPE? They are a company based out of Canada that has come up with a nutritional formula that feeds the brain, basically the ingredients that create neurotransmitters, especially the B vitamins....B12.....??

Is there any way of me being able to talk with you ? I haven't been depressed in over 10 yrs, which landed me in the hospital in 2000, and both my brothers have been diagnosed with BI-POLAR. One has tried to kill himself three times unsuccessfully--he's addicted to crack and heroin ( poor soul). The other tends to manage his life without drugs, but can't cope with a job. I myself have had my own practice for 6 yrs, am.highly creative when I'm healthy, highly energetic, passionate and enthusiastic. I used to say I get high on LIFE, but when my lows come.they really wreak havoc. My panic attacks have gone, but being on the meds (20mg) Citalopram (generic celexa), I'm kind of numb, and it deflates my personality.

Do you believe in the Candida theory of depression ? Systemic Candida ?? what are your thoughts ?

I just want to get my life back. In the last 2 years I built a business to 10-15k in less than 15 months.and came off my meds for the 1st time in 4 yrs. I was feeling great,until this all started happening. I USUALLY SNAP OUT OF IT.....

Would love to hear back from you....
GOD BLESS
with unconditional love and gratitude.

Dear Dr. __________

I was diagnosed with bipolar (along with my father and brother--they called it manic depression those days). I suffered with panic attacks, migraine headaches, claustrophobia, depression and mania for more than 30 years.

I became a board-certified cognitive behavioral therapist to help myself, but found little to help me get out of my bipolar condition in either psychology or psychiatry. Not until I studied neuroscience did I see exactly how my brain got into depression, headaches, panic attacks, etc, and how I could absolutely prevent all of it.

The key to depression is he process of pain perception. If you read my book Depression is a Choice (I think they have it for $1 on Amazon now) you will see how I educated myself to get out of being controlled by my own brain--it is the philosophy of how to get out of depression.

My book Brainswitch out of Depression is more "how-to" --the neuroscience of how to get out of depression. If you read all the info on the website, and read the letters on my blog http://MobyJane.blogspot.com/ you will see that the main component of depression is a chemical imbalance in the brain.

I flatly reject the genetic component. The fact that you or your siblings are not in charge of your own thinking is the problem, not some inherited disease. Street drugs, and alcohol abuse always end up in depression. But so do anti-depressants. Relationships are influenced by your depression, they don’t necessarily cause it. You can always alter your environment, or, if that is not possible, you can alter the way you think about your environment and the way you interact with your environment. For understanding this I suggest you read Viktor Frankl’s book “Man’s Search for Meaning.” Nutrition is necessary for good health, if you’re not in good health, that could cause depression, but not necessarily.

The chemical imbalance, which all these anti-depressants purport to cure, is caused by anxious thinking (much of which you may not be aware) that triggers the fight or flight response and dumps a bunch of stress chemicals in the brain which are extremely hard on the metabolic processes of the body. You don’t need drugs to change your way of thinking. You can do it as an act of will. Taking drugs to change your depressive thinking is like taking your car to the repair shop because it isn’t driving you to the correct address.

The ads they have on television where people complain about having to wind themselves up to be interested in life and therefore you need drugs are disgusting. So wind yourself up. Get moving. Get up and do something, no matter how bad you feel, and in the doing of something productive, you begin to feel better.

I will be glad to answer any specific questions you have about depression as you look over this material and try to apply it to your life. I do not take private patients anymore but answer anyone's specific questions and I do not charge for this.

A. B. Curtiss