Hello Ms Curtiss

I came across your website by sheer accident. Am a 72 yr old male diagnosed in 1978 as a manic depressive and been carrying the curse with me pretty much constantly since then. Tried various anti-depressants and settled on Wellbutrin and Klonopin and been taking them for years. My daughter is worse than me, and takes those and several other meds besides, as does her daughter now 21.Today matter of fact!

Since I read your first chapter I have tried the mantra of the "Green Frog: and not sure if it's the improved weather (which never much helped me in the past) or that I have actually warded off the symptoms. All I know is I use it often when the "heavy" feeling approaches. It's maybe too soon to tell ( 2 weeks) but if this continues I will slowly try to wean myself off these drugs. I am a retired pharmacist and hate taking them. Will keep you informed. Know you must be very busy and don't expect a reply.

Yours respectfully, B. N.

Dear B. N.

Glad “green frog” is working for you. I’ll be glad to answer any questions you have.
A. B. Curtiss

Dear A. B.

Since we last talked quite some time ago, and not sure when that was, I HAD gotten off the anti-depressants and used the "green frog" ever since with great success.

In Nov, we were struck with a great tragedy here and my beloved granddaughter was killed in an auto accident on the way back to her college in upstate N.Y.

This has thrown my entire family into turmoil. They are all on anti-depressants, tranquilizers, sleeping pills and doing counselors. I am not, but I had told my granddaughter, J___ was her name, about “green frog” and she had bought one and stuck it on my car's front windshield. So now when I think "Green Frog" she comes to mind, but I will never remove that frog. So it's a mixed bag here as far as depression goes but STILL no Wellbutrin. I'm holding my own.

Thank you for showing me "the way" and I will investigate your new book. I hesitated to write to you when this first happened with my granddaughter and I'm 74 now, so my memory may have failed me on that one..

You are doing good work. Keep it up. It worked for me but I haven't been able to replace the "green frog" with my own mantra. Still, the depression has been manageable, even though the sadness is always there now. There is a difference between the two and I know that now. Best regards and good luck on your new book, B.N.