Dear A.B. Curtiss,

I am currently working through issues with my son's depression and have urged my son to adopt many of the thinking patterns you have described. He was diagnosed "schizophrenic" a few years ago and had never appeared depressed. He has been off medication for almost a year, receiving psychotherapy, vitamin supplements and other interesting holistic interventions. He now seems "depressed" and emotional. I consider this a tremendous improvement! We are in the middle of all this right now and sometimes it is hard to see the light at the end of the tunnel. When this happens, I turn to the web for inspiration. Today I found it at your website. I have ordered your book from Amazon.

Best regards,
R.A.


Dear R.A.

Thank you for your letter. My book Depression is a Choice is the philosophy of how you get out of depression. My book Brainswitch out of Depression is the neuroscience of how you get out of depression and it is a bit more user friendly to read, more self-helpy, if you will. It continues to amaze me how doctors and psychiatrists imagine that people can get out of depression who have no idea how their own brains work, how they get from one thought to another. As far as I know I am the first person to connect the process of pain perception with getting out of depression. I'll be glad to answer any questions you might have. A. B. Curtiss


Dear A.B.

Thanks for the extra tip. I'll also order the Brainswitch book for my son. He is trying hard and coming at in in different ways is very helpful. He is also doing the Alexander Technique, which seems like it is about choices and actions.
I will be excited to read your books and should I have any questions, I will ask. One very good point you made on your website is about how your brain reacts when you think of a lemon. I was so discouraged by seeing pictures of supposedly damaged schizophrenic brains, until I thought, for heaven's sake - If I thought about sex, my brain image would look at certain way. Nobody is trying to make sex a brain disease.
A. B. Curtiss

Dear R. A.

Yes, it is a shame that people are being made ill just because people say they're ill. Slowly people are starting to see they have been ill served, pardon the pun, by the psychiatric community who deal with things from a pathological view when they don't have to.