Hello A.B. Curtiss

I have suffered with anxiety for many years and with depression for several months.  I have attempted to take many different pharmaceuticals and have had intolerable side effects.  Therefore, I have not been able to increase to a therapeutic dose
. 
 I came across your website by Divine intervention while searching for exercises that would help with anxiety.  I have learned so much from your website.  It is truly amazing!  I would like to read both
your books and learn how to manage my anxiety and depression.  I am feeling extremely overwhelmed at this time and don't know which one to start with. I would like to ask you which book I should start with.  How are the books similar and how do they differ?  I would like to begin with the one that offers the tools I need to begin working on my issues.  Once I am in a better place, I can move onto the other book. I greatly appreciate the valuable information you share on your website and look forward to your response. W

Dear W

The book DEPRESSION IS A CHOICE is my psychological autobiography—how I got out of my bipolar situation of several decades without drugs. It is the philosophy of how you get out of depression. How you must re-situate yourself in the world as a person in charge of your life rather than the victim of it. It is the journey I took, how I educated myself as a manic depressive (that’s what they called it when I was first diagnosed) and as I educated myself how my thinking and behavior changed and I was able to get out of depression any time it came upon me.


The book BRAINSWITCH OUT OF DEPRESION is the neuroscience of how you get out of
depression. It is more of a user-friendly self-help book with the exercises and the theory I devised to help myself make my own journey back to sanity, and, in a way, is a kind of synthesis
of the first book. I would read the Brainswitch book first and then the other book. I will be glad to answer any questions you have as you go on your journey. A. B. Curtiss