Dear AB

Originally I was going through a stressful time after many long years of constant stress. I couldn't sleep and was very anxious and so I was put on antidepressants, I tried to get off but became very depressed, I was put back on them and something to sleep was added. That stopped working and I was put on something else for 4 years then That quit working so, 8 years on antidepressants, and then in 2005 I was completely depressed , since then I have been on many mood stabilizes and antidepressant but, still have anxiety and depression.

I was a dentist for 21 years and have three grown kids, i have not been able to work since 2005 and have been on every class of antidepressants, been to the Menninger clinic for six weeks and had transcranial magnetic stimulation. I am now on a variety of med's which keep me from being suicidal, but,I have no get up and go, I am still anxious and very depressed. I have been to several therapist. would love to get off medications and get back to my old optimistic self. B

Dear B,

I suggest you see a doctor of Chinese Medicine to see if you need some nutrients that would balance the hormones in your body. This hormonal imbalance is very common in both men and women in their 50s. If the drugs have caused your nerves to be over-stimulated causing anxiety I recommend that you read Claire Weeks book HOPE AND HELP FOR YOUR NERVES. I also suggest you increase your physical activity—try a few things and see if something clicks, either get a trainer at a local gym, swim, take a course in yoga or Tae Kwon Do. For repressed fear and anxiety I suggest transcendental meditation which is very low key or Osho Dynamic Meditation which is very active. Here are some links to Osho Dynamic Meditation

http://www.youtube.com/movie?v=HtgaZS1fh-A&feature=mv_sr

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t5Ao--mbIho

Another thing for helping with social anxiety and re-engaging with your fellow man, I suggest a course in Toastmaster’s International which is available in any small town and is very inexpensive.

I’m sorry I can’t advise you on what to do about your drug intake as I have no experience with drugs. You will have to see your medical doctor for advice on that. You can use any of my cognitive behavior mind techniques whether you are on medication or not as there is no downside risk to having a better understanding of how your brain works and why you think the way you do.

Western medicine took a wrong turn when they rejected out-of-hand the 10,000 year old medical practices of the Eastern world. We are starting to wake up to energy fields, hypnosis, acupuncture, massage therapy, etc. We are great when it comes to surgery and diagnosis of organ failure. However the medical establishment in the US is stuck in its refusal to apply the theories of quantum physics and views the body only as a physical machine that operates according to Newtonian principles, ignoring completely Einstein’s theory of relativity, the fact that matter, even human cells are not made up of physical matter as the pharmaceutical companies think of it but rather energy and physical matter so interrelated that they cannot be separated out. Everybody talks about E=mc2 but they have no idea of the significance to bodily health. 

The use of anti-depressants, etc. is based on a linear information flow from A to B. But the body should not be viewed in terms of Newtonian physics but Quantum physics and when you introduce a chemical to have an effect on one thing, the information, the energy, from that introduced chemical goes every which way, holistically with all kinds of unintended consequences.

The Journal of the American Medical Association in 2000 said that 120,000 people die each year as a result of iatrogenic illness (as a result of medical treatment) which make it the 3rd leading cause of death in the US. Dr. G. Null wrote in his 2003 book that it is now the leading cause of deaths in the U.S. with 300,000 people victims of iatrogenic illness. We have to think holistically and look for alternatives to the “magic pill.”  However there is light at the end of the tunnel. People are now seeking alternative and integrated health practitioners. A. B. Curtiss