I didn't wake up with depression this morning. I had it last night and used the "Yes, we have no bananas" song whenever I got up to go to the bathroom. I woke up about 6 a.m. but stayed in bed. I noticed I was slightly depressed but the real futility and hopelessness never really emerged because I kept thinking, "Okay, I'm depressed so I can get up and write about it." But I kept falling back to sleep and by the time I got up at 6:45 a.m. I was so well into planning the morning, thinking about writing my blog, a breakfast appointment with a grandson, chatting with my husband as we made the bed, that any residual depression went away with no exercises. I still had a bit of physical symptoms, tight chest,  shallow breath but no real pain in the chest area.

Then I opened my email and got the wonderful comment on the post. I almost said a couple of things yesterday that I thought sounded kind of pretentious or something so I didn't. But now, I don't know, maybe I'll mention what I thought. First thought was, should I keep analyzing my own depression on my blog. Is this helpful to anybody?

Now, clearly, I got that wonderful comment to let me know it isn't all in vain. Not wonderful in that somebody else is suffering for which I am truly sorry to hear. But wonderful in that it makes such a connection to me, my work, my efforts.. Thank you so much BLUEYEDANE I am very grateful. I hope you, too, are feeling okay today.

Another thing I thought was that maybe depression is my "task" on earth for a good reason. Maybe I'm supposed to get depression still so I can study it and pass on what I learn and maybe, in some way, it is a necessary balance to my ongoingness and without this heavy anchor now and then to stop me in my tracks, I might not head in a true course.

But this moment I am so completely okay, and so grateful for my life and my husband, and family and friends at home and all of you out there that I never see face to face and yet we have such a heart connection that means so much to me.

Hopefully I'll be hit by depression in the morning so I can continue my work. Well, that's what I just thought and I decided not to edit it out no matter how phony it might sound. A. B. Curtiss