Dear Ms Curtiss 


According to my email last time that I felt much better after I discovered that getting red of the saliva that was accumulated in the top of my head and which was the main cause of the severe pain and depression I was experienced. 

I am much better now and my depression changed. The only thing that causes me anxious and worried is the physical pain when I feel physically the neurons becomes hard and walking is one way to lessen the pain.    


I need to know if any one went through this before 


Regards 
R

Dear Ms Curtiss 


I feel all this on the top of my head. Is there any solution for this because this my my main issue. Does a hospital has thing to do with this? R.

Dear R.

What happens sometimes is that constant tension causes muscles to tighten and that can cause pain. Sometimes fascia,  a connective tissue that surrounds muscles, groups of muscles, blood vessels, and nerves, binding those structures together, can connect muscles together than shouldn't be connected, kind of like adhesions after surgery. Which is why they like for people to walk right away so that fascia doesn't form where it's not supposed to. Massage therapy does wonders for this problem. A. B. Curtiss


Thanks  R

Yes, exactly thats what I feel on the top of my head and around my mouth. Thats why I feel negative and fear sometimes. I think these muscles, blood vessels, and nerves were active since I was child but it became stronger by the time. Same thing my brothers. and it might be my child too.

IS this why people get depressed or it has no relation with depression. ? 

Dear R, 

 Some of what you describe could easily be caused by anxiety, which is fearful thinking that causes stress chemicals to dump into the system. One of the body's normal reaction to stress chemicals is a feeling of tightness in the head--some describe it as a band of iron around the scalp. Read Claire Weeks book "Hope and Help for your Nerves" for more about the body's natural reaction to stress chemicals. A. B. Curtiss


Dear Ms Curtiss 
I strongly appreciate your help this info helped me alot  