As a result of the following letter I have decided to post on my website the list of those therapists who use my methods or suggest my books in their practice (which would mean their work was along similar lines.).  So if anyone knows of psychiatrists, psychologisits, psychotherapists or LCSW’s whose work is similar to mine , please let me know and I will add them to the list on my website. Here is the letter:

Hi~~

 I just left you a voice message.  Will you let me know if you didn't get it (if you're out of town or something)?  And then I will repeat the voice message in writing!

Basically, the succinct version, I'm an LCSW in private practice for 26 years, I love your book (it's the way I've been working with clients for many years), and I'm looking for help in finding a therapist for a 24 year-old in NYC (someone who might work the way you and I do).

Thanks so much!
 Leah Henigson

Dear Leah,

I'm so sorry but I don't know any therapists in New York that use my methods. I have been asked many times to recommend therapists in different part of the country. I think I will post your letter on my blog and perhaps someone will know of a therapist.

 I have heard from many therapists who use my book but somehow, over the years, I didn't think to organize that information into a list. Now I will start to do that and I will put your name on the top. So please send me your business number and address and I will post it on my blog. I'm always happy to hear that my book has been helpful and I thank you for your letter and for recommending my book. Although you didn't specify whether it was Depression is a Choice, or Brainswitch out of Depression. A. B. Curtiss

Dear A.B.~~

Thank you so much for your response.  And thank you for beginning to organize a network, of sorts.  My professional name is Leah K. Henigson, 232 Nutley St., Ashland, OR 97520.  Phone number is 541-488-8936. 

The book I was referring to was Depression Is a Choice; I didn't know about Brainswitch.  Now I have that to look forward to!! 

I would love to stay in touch.  And thank you for your commitment and courage in writing that book!

Leah

Dear Leah,

I have sent your information to my webmaster  to post on my website. A. B. Curtiss