Dear Y_______

Your efforts are paying off because you have been at work most of the time.  Your last letter meant to say that your efforts are NOT paying off but something deep within you knows better and wants better and so you forgot the NOT. From your letter it seems that you should be trying to figure out what you are not doing well at work so that you can improve yourself.

Just improve one thing every day at work. Be sure and apologize for your lack and not make excuses. Try and help others at work too in little ways, even help to carry things, or anything to show you want to be a team player, and part of things. There are tens of millions of people who are struggling in this world.You are not the only one.

Here's how one famous psychologist, William James, who is known as the Father of Psychology described his own depression: This is from my book that I’m editing:

William James, the "father of psychology," suffered terribly from depression. He would become famous for separating out psychology from "mental philosophy" and bringing the experience of human emotions to the scientific laboratory. But he would not find a cure for his own pain there.
 
It would not be to science that this great scientist turned for salvation when depression threatened to overwhelm him. In his hour of need, this world-renowned physician used the simplistic device of repeating simple religious sayings over and over to himself

Here’s how James described it in his own words: 

"I awoke morning after morning with a horrible dread at the pit of my stomach, and with a sense of the insecurity of life that I never knew before, and that I have never felt since. It was like a revelation; and although the immediate feelings passed away, the experience has made me sympathetic with the morbid feelings of others ever since. It gradually faded, but  for months I was unable to go out into the dark alone...I mean that the fear was so invasive and powerful that if I had not clung to scripture-texts like 'the eternal God is my refuge,' etc., 'Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden,'etc., 'I am the resurrection and the life,' etc., I think I should have grown really insane."

I'm editing my book for Kindle. As I come across stories that I think might be supportive in getting through your day I will send them along. A. B. Curtiss