Hi A.B.!


I was so happy to see the last post on your blog!

I liked what you added about the Law of Attraction. I've been reading about that recently! "We don't attract what we want, we attract what we are." I appreciate that clear, concise pointer. Thanks.

I've been reading more about non-duality across disciplines. Growing familiar with Buddhist writings & with the Vedas of Hinduism-the Upanishads & the Bhagavad Gita, with Taoism, Lao-Tzu's writings. Also, from my own tradition, Christian--Thomas Merton, St. John of the Cross, Evelyn Underhill, Saint Teresa of Avila, and today's Cynthia Bourgeault & Richard Rohr are wonderful teachers. Of course, the amazing work of Joel Goldsmith is a rich resource. I just read a book by William Samuel which reminded me a bit of JG.

In Rohr's new book, Immortal Diamond, there is a chapter called "If it is True, it is True Everywhere." He talks about how across the disciplines- biology, physics, psychology, the arts, theology and all through nature, and all through spirituality, the same truth asserts itself. If it is true, it will be seen everywhere!

I know that you studied in India, have a background in science, have the soul of a poet, and a deep spirituality. I think you are the perfect person to ask--when you discovered all was illusion, or maya, was that uplifting or challenging, or a little of both? Do you find you have a sense of play with the world of form now...as opposed to taking it all so seriously? That could be uplifting.

I am not at all a math or science person, but through some writing geared toward lay people, I've gathered striking common threads regarding the essential nature of all of creation. “As above so below.” This describes perfectly the fractal and holographic nature of not only the universe but the human body as well. Each cell contains all of the DNA information necessary to create an identical copy of the whole organism.

The same can be said for fractals and holograms, in each part the whole is contained. Break a holographic image in half and you do not get half of the image, you get a smaller version of the whole. The universe including all life forms sentient or non-sentient and non living substances conform to the fractal nature of reality. Changes in any level of the system effects the structure of the whole.

It's been determined that subatomic particles can manifest either as,

• a wave function

• as a particle

Furthermore it was discovered that the action of measuring or observing the particles seemed to be the key in the collapse of the wave function. The observer caused the wave function, which generated an interference pattern, to become a physical particle simply by measuring it.
So...there is a role which consciousness or observation plays in the behavior of subatomic particles!

With regard to holographic reality,

• consciousness is the energy source

• your DNA is the receiver

Even what we perceive as solid objects are all manifestations of wave energy forms.

So solid objects, or our perception of them as solid, is an illusory interpretation of varying frequencies by our DNA and brain.

From the Bhagavad Gita: The perfectly peaceful Absolute is not different from the playful universe. They are simply not two realities. Nor are they two dimensions of the same reality. They are not even two perspectives. Not two! Absolutely not two!

I would love to hear about your experience with this. There is a world beyond thought. Pure awareness. We are That.

Driven by the forces of love, the fragments of the world seek each other so that the world may come to being.

~ Pierre Teilhard de Chardin



Dear G,

You wrote: "The perfectly peaceful Absolute is not different from the playful universe." I think it would be more understandable if you said. "The world is non-different from the Absolute." I think saying non-different is more clear than not different. You can have two things that are not different but to be non-different implies interconnectedness. This is also why we can't get to the Truth through the reasoning process. For the reasoning process to work, we have to be the objective observer of something. We can't be the objective observer of what we are non-different from.

One can overwhelm the brain with trying to figure things out. Is it to no end? Absolutely not. Many wonderful things for our comfort have come from studying and understanding the physical environment and inventing things like cars, television, electric lights. When power goes out we remember how much we appreciate hot water, hot soup, television and lights to read by.

But the physical realities are not the way to a spiritual relationship with the Absolute.

Many wise men have been gained wisdom that they can pass down to us by eschewing the “workaway world” in favor of meditation.

It is also true that many human beings live without these technological advances and derive joy from the light of their campfire and their entertainment by songs and watching the stars. And all human beings crave the company of their fellows. And all humans crave love and respect from their fellows.

So does this mean we should turn away from our comforts, cease to interact with our high tech society? To dwell on the marvel of these things and to enjoy them, in a way, is to honor our creator by celebrating the life he has given us. It will not last forever. Man is mortal and all his works are ephemeral. Shall we use that as an excuse to dismiss it all?

Which would be impossible since we are non-different from everything that is. You can say that human life (the physical world) is both really apparent and apparently real. It is really apparent because it exists for a time but it is only apparently real because it does not last forever. 

In the end, I believe in being practical in a workaday world sense. In the workaday world It is love that saves us, love that guides us and love that we are made of. When in doubt, do the loving thing. When in fear, ask for grace. And we can always hold each other’s hand when crossing a dangerous street.

 Perhaps a poem by the poet Milton will help explain what I mean.

Milton’s Sonnet on his Blindness


When I consider how my light is spent,

Ere half my days in this dark world and wide,

And that one talent which is death to hide

Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent

To serve therewith my Maker, and present

My true account, lest He returning chide;

"Doth God exact day-labor, light denied?"

I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent

That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need

Either man's work or His own gifts. Who best

Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best. His state

Is kingly: thousands at His bidding speed,

And post o'er land and ocean without rest;

They also serve who only stand and wait."