First I want to express my thanks for people who email me with supporting comments, and helpful ideas.  Someone wrote me that when they read in one of my first blogs that I beat depression, they understood where I was coming from, and they would go on to read the blog with a clearer understanding. Sometimes I forget that the most important thing about my work it that I beat my own manic depression (they call it bipolar now.).

I guess I do forget that sometimes, in the busyness of trying to answer someone's question. The most important thing about all my exercises and explanations is that these are the exact things that got me out of depression, and continue to get me out of depression whenever depression hits me. I spent so many decades a slave to depression whenever it called upon me to do its bidding, you'd think I wouldn't forget. But because I haven't "been depressed" for more than twenty years, I don't always remember that I need, more often, to make that connection for people.

There is no way to tell someone to read the first two blogs first. So I guess I will have to think about re-writing my intro that appears at the beginning of the most current daily post.

I will try to incorporate that most important fact in the most concise way, not leaving out all those things that add legitimate credibility to what I say.

In the meantime, let me state again. I beat depression with mind tricks, inspiration and intellectual understanding from ancient wisdom, and a system of brainswitching techniques I created by using the ideas and exercises on myself and my own depression. It is a system that never fails to work.  I can show it to anyone that wants to learn some cognitive behavioral techniques.

It doesn't matter if a person is on medication for depression. Learning how your brain works, and how you can manage a big depression hit can be useful if you are on or off depression medication. These techniques have no negative side effects. The only problem is that it is very difficult at first to direct your own thinking because your brain's entrenched thinking habits are hard to break. That's the bad news.

The good news is that it does get easier as you automatically start to build new neural connections to the new habits of thinking, but it always takes a great deal of effort and tenacity to turn away from depression when it hits.