Dear A.B.

I have been working on brainswitching and also filling my days with activities and not staying in bed since I last wrote to you - except for a few days I was out with food poisoning. Some few days I feel okay, but many days are still very challenging and I even think of death- though I catch myself right away and say "not an option", so I am prevailing. I'm due to go back to work in two weeks - which would make it 3 months off work.

I know there was a similar question on your blog recently, but I wonder if I'm well enough to go back to work when I'm still unstable and haven't mastered brainswitching yet. On one hand, it will give me something to do, feel connected to society and I feel that it will help away from the self-focus and aid in my recovery. On the other hand, I fear if I'll be able to sustain the work pressure and fear that my condition may worsen. I really cannot afford to have another breakdown and not be able to work once i go back. It's happenned too many times in the past with work, and i feel this is my ladt chance. But the thought of more time off and too much time on hand is also a frightening thought. I would be grateful for your advise.
Kindest regards, Y

Dear A.B.

I have been working on brainswitching and also filling my days with activities and not staying in bed since I last wrote to you - except for a many days are still very challenging and I even think of death- though I catch myself right away and say "not an option", so I am prevailing. I'm due to go back to work in a few weeks - which would make it several months off work. Y________

Dear Y_____

The decision to go back to work is yours to make. I have only a few comments other than the fact that perhaps it is time to rejoin the workaday world and it would give you a ongoing healthy schedule and routine that would leave less time for self-focus.

Whenever you decide to go back to work, concentrate on what you are doing, avoid all thinking about how you are feeling. Everytime you start questioning how you feel, immediately stop, and refocus on what you are doing.

Any decision should be made on the basis of the love of something rather than the fear of something. A. B. Curtiss

Dear Y_____

Thank you very much for your reply and advice. I, too, think that it's probably better to go back for the healthy schedule and routine that work will provide. So I'm glad to hear your views as well. Well noted on the concetration factor on anything I'm doing at work. I really feel it will air dramatically in my recovery. Thank you again!