Hello,

My name is T___. I am going through a really hard break- up with someone that I truly love. Do you think that your techniques could help me with the pain? Yours, T.G

Dear T. G.

Yes, the techniques will help. There is a difference in mourning a loss and the chemical process of depression that will take you over if you let yourself go too deeply into self-focus. Sadness is not depression. Depression is the inability to choose to function from the neocortex because of your preoccupation with the emotion raging in the subcortex.

If you are not tough with yourself, you will become emotionally dependent. That is, you will not be able to choose to function from your thinking brain when your emotional brain has plunged you into despair. Pills is what most people grab onto. However, if you can grab onto some information about how your brain works you can manipulate your brain to do the thinking you want it to do instead of rote, habitual depressive thinking. My book “Brainswitch out of Depression” would be better I think for you at this time than the book “Depression is a Choice.”

A. B. Curtiss


Dear A. B.

THANK YOU. I hope sunshine is always with you. :) T. G.

Dear A. B. Curtiss
Thank you. The pain is like darkness at this moment. I am going to embrace it and let it do its work. It seems to ravage it's way through us destroying everything in its course. I guess we have to focus on and hope in what is left. It's almost like a sculpting. A chipping away at ourselves and our wants. Leaving us with what I have no idea. I do not believe I can mask it or push it away. It would be like trying to clench the sea in my fist. I believe it is going to wash over me. I have been through so much pain in my life. So much pain. I guess we all have. Thank you so much and I will check out that book. T.G.

Dear T. G.

It helps to think of your pain as a specific neural pattern in your brain that you are presently concentrating on and, the truth is, you could choose some other thought pattern and insist on concentrating upon that--even something dumb like an old nursery rhyme, “row row row your boat.” For as long as you can concentrate on a thought that has no emotional connotation, you can be free from pain. You improve with practice. Do it. Think “row, row, row your boat” over and over. Or some other nonsense thought or mantra of your own choice. Peace be with you, you are not alone. A. B. Curtiss


Hi there,

Well I just finished your "Brainswitch" book and I can honestly say it is the best self help book I've ever read. I would even consider your books and methodology to be among the greatest achievements in modern Psychology. No one else really seems to understand how the depressive mind behaves and reacts, thus no one else could understand a useful way to cope with it.

I've read a lot on the theory and treatment of depression and anxiety- from Freud to Beck and everyone in between. THIS SHOULD BE THE MAIN TEXTBOOK FOR EVERY CARING COUNSELOR AND THERAPIST.

As I've stated to you in a previous letter, I've suffered from depression and panic since I was 31. I'm now 42 and I've had some good years, but every now and then that feeling creeps back and takes over. Luckily, drugs worked pretty good for me. But the side effects really are a pain. When I go off of them, though, the feelings return.

Your techniques have helped so much. I could not even begin to tell you. My relapse is now gone, and I thank you. The really nice thing is that it works so fast--instead of waiting around for months for antidepressants to kick in.

Anyway, thank you for sharing the knowledge you have acquired and for spreading hope among the hopeless.

Thanks, TG

Dear TG

You are welcome. You’ll be happy to know that BRAINSWITCH OUT OF DEPRESSION has now been translated in 4 countries—Russia, Japan, Lithuania, and Estonia. I have had correspondence with doctors in China and India about translating there but so far no contracts have been signed. If you have any questions, I’ll be glad to answer them. A. B. Curtiss