Hi,

I want to thank you for your book Depression is a Choice.  I have had my own struggles with depression and victim hood, and as a result, I did some research and wrote a book of my own called Strategies for Happiness (www.S4HTheBook.com). I am in the process of developing a workshop - I am calling it a playshop - which is based on my book, and in the process of doing more research for concepts and ideas I can use for the playshop, I came across your book - and I am loving it.  Not only does is resonate with many of the ideas I talk about in my book, but it takes the ideas to the next level.

I am writing to ask you for permission to use your book and information on your website in the development of my workshop.  I would of course give you credit, and also promote your book as well.

The basic theme of my workshop is what I call Ownership - that we must own all aspects of our life in order to break free - in other words, personal responsibility. That is the basic premise I get from your works.  The way you have worded things have made so much sense to me, and I know is going to help me in my own life, as well as - if you will allow me to - help all that I share through my workshop. 

Although I primarily wrote my book for my own learning experience, I am happy to have published it and let people take from it what they will.  I am not out to fix people, just share some ideas that I have come across that have helped me, and let them decide if it is of use to them.  I have found that I have sometimes just overheard a conversation or a speech and maybe just one line they said spoke to me and I got an idea and went in a different direction then I was going, and because of that I am living a happier life. 

As I read your book, I am constantly being hit with concepts that either really enforces what I have come to believe, or opened my mind even further to understanding.  For example, you mentioned in your book that even after all you learned, you still wake up depressed, but that you now recognize it and take action, quickly snapping out of it.  This small concept really hit home with me.  Lately, I have been experiencing a mild depression when I get up in the morning.  When this happens, I get worried that I am doing something wrong and there is something wrong with me.  Sometimes I snap out of it, other times I let it colour my day.  But when I read your experience, I thought to myself, I am OK, I just need to be aware and take the proper action and I will overcome this.  That has lifted such a weight from my shoulders.

I especially love the chapter on blame.  That really opened my eyes.  I have not yet finished the book, but I could not wait to connect with you.

So, let me know if I can use your material and what would the parameters be.

Thanks again for a great read.

Sincerely,

Donna Hedley


Dear Donna,

Good for you that you are taking control of your own life. It is a scary thing to accept the fact that no one is going to save us. We try, in vain, to pretend that we are not afraid. Once we accept the fear, however, we start to see that there are like-minded people struggling by our side as we go about our daily lives. The fact that we can turn to each other on the journey, and help each other, makes it all worthwhile.

You have my permission to use any material from my books (Depression is a Choice and Brainswitch out of Depression and my blog) as long as you give me credit and a link to my author website http://www.abcurtiss.com

A. B. Curtiss