QUESTION:

I really seem to struggle with practicing brainswitching on days when I don't have much going on. Weekends and evenings are hard for me. Today started to doubt the process altogether. I think I could use some couching or reassurance.  Can you tell that this has worked for people? I could really use the reassurance.

All I really have to go on are you and a few Amazon reviews (and any courage I can drum up). I would love to hear from you that you have seen this work for people. That you personally have seen more than just your own life changed from this.

Also, to pull me out of this I mainly use the "green frog" type exercise. Is that the method you recommend? There are sooo many exercises in the book and I am a little intimidated by that. I would like it to be as simple as using green frog. My thinking about everything is so damn negative! I seem to see everything as a problem or a threat. I am so damn tense. I just want to cry and scream, why me? And when can I relax? I had a much easier time of it the first few days after I read the book...I felt inspired. Some part of me really does suspect that this could be my ticket to freedom, but I don't want it to be too good to be true. I understand that you have to believe for anything to really work. I guess I am asking for more to believe in. You really aren't afraid of it anymore? You know other people that aren't afraid anymore?

I know you may find yourself busy, so...when you have the time.

ANSWER:

Don’t worry about belief. Just use common sense. If you try something and you get a good result, use it again. The fear that it won’t “really work,” is unreasonable fear. You can’t use unreasonable fear for anything worthwhile so whenever unreasonable fear pops up—turn your thoughts to common sense thoughts and reach for something that has worked before.

Yes, I know of many people that have used just a simple exercise like "green frog," or "hippoty hop", or"so what" and have not sunk back into their habitual depression.

The elaborate exercises are for further work .You can always learn something from them but they are not necessary to get out of depression. I still use simple exercises myself whenever I need them.

No, I'm not afraid of my own brain anymore as I am in charge of it.  Not because of my belief in any system, but because I have learned to use a little common sense and that has given me the confidence over time that I can always use my common sense when fear strikes.

Your thinking does not ever have to be negative. You can always change it to something non-emotional or more productive. It is common sense. The opposite is untrue. It is simply untrue that you can't think a positive thought when you want. It is simply untrue that you are forced to only think a negative thought when it pops up and have no choice in the matter.

So you are in fear because of something that is untrue. Does that make common sense? Yes, it takes courage to take charge and take full responsibility for your own thinking when it is a new idea to you.


Courage comes with the exercise of it. There is an alternative to thinking a non-emotional thought or a productive thought when fear arises. The alternative is to think a depressive or negative thought. But a depressive or negative thought is an unnecessary alternative. You are terrified of an unnecessary alternative. It is always easy to freak out. But it is not necessary.