February in Review

I’m continuing my monthly blog review with a recap of February. I find this is the ideal way to assess the posts I’ve written and the interaction they received, as well as share the links in case anyone missed one.

I’ve also shared the link to a guest post I wrote for the Women Writers, Women’s Books site.

February was all about the theme of self-love on my blog, and it was a popular topic with my readers. It seems we all suffer from a little self-doubt, comparison, and guilt!

How was February?

Stats:

I’m over the moon with the increase in views this month. Overall, the blog received 25,777 new visits which is incredible. Yay! The most popular post of the month was Stop Comparing Yourself to Others (biggest interaction for a blog post EVER!).

Published Posts:

Week 1 – 5 Top Tips for Working on Self-Love

Week 2 – Ditch the Guilt

Week 3 – Stop Comparing Yourself to Others

Week 4 – February in Review

Guest Post:

Motivate Me! Using real life to influence my non-fiction on Women Writers, Women’s Books.

Goals for March:

When I glance out of the window, I can see a few signs of life. There is a smattering of colour in the flower borders as the daffodils break through, and with it comes a sense of relief that winter is almost over.

I thought it would be the perfect time to blog about clearing and cleansing in readiness for spring. Cleansing our mind, body, and soul, as well as clearing the clutter (emotionally and physically), so check back every Monday for a new post.

Over to You:

Your mission if you choose to accept it is…

I thought it might be a fun twist if at the end of every monthly review I set you some fun and thought-provoking exercises. I want you to think about the following questions, grab your journal and note down any thoughts or feelings that bubble to the surface or feel free to add your thoughts in the comments below.

I was delighted to see that following my January in Review post, fellow blogger, Shaun, from ClockworkClouds dedicated an entire blog post to his answers for last month’s questions. You can read his post HERE.

Q1. What is it all for? Why am I doing this blog/career/hobby?

Q2. What do I want out of blog/career/hobby/relationships/life?

Q3. Where can I find the balance in my life?

I’ll add another three questions to the March review. You don’t need to share your answers; they’re for your personal development. If you can keep all your notes together in one journal then by the end of the year, you’ll have a great overview of 2017 to work with when you want to do a review, set goals, or release anything that isn’t serving your greater purpose. Until next month.

Thanks for visiting my blog, I hope you enjoyed this post. Want more? Connect with me here:  Twitter @ShelleyWilson72, Instagram or check out my Facebook pages http://www.facebook.com/FantasyAuthorSLWilson and http://www.facebook.com/MotivateMeBlog. You can also find me on Pinterest