Writers' block is something I have never had to worry about.  I suffer from the opposite problem of having too much to write and no structure in place to streamline those thoughts.

However, as I was sitting at my laptop ready to type this week's post, I stopped.  I experienced that moment of emptiness with my fingertips hovering over the keys.  Not because I didn't know what to say, but for once in my life, I didn't know quite how to say it.

Allow me to explain.  This week has been a blessing for me, I love my holistic job and facilitated a successful workshop on creating vision boards.  I started my meditation classes up again for the new term and I completed the first edit on my debut fiction novel.  Just this morning I received a beautiful email telling me I had been nominated for another Blogger award (that's two in as many weeks) and a second email asking if I would like to be interviewed for a very prominent blog.  Fantastic!  Last week I checked the sales of my non-fiction book (How I Changed My Life in a Year - http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B00KAAUE88) and found that I was still in the top 50 of Amazon best sellers for self-help and memoir.  Feedback continues to be positive and reviews have been incredible.

This is all very wonderful and gives me plenty to write about, but I've also spoken to a number of my clients and friends over the past few weeks who aren't having such a great time.  They are feeling dejected, anxious and find themselves wishing the next few months away so they can put 2014 behind them.

It stopped me in my tracks.  I was hearing what they were saying but for how long had they tried to say it?  Was I so wrapped up in myself that I'd missed their cry for help?  I've since dug a little deeper and now realise that they have coped alone and only now are feeling so desperate that they are able to voice their concerns.  I understood this.  I spent many years living my 'closed book' life before finding the strength to speak out.

Our family experienced three consecutive years filled with loss and grief and it was very hard to focus on the positives that were going on around us.  This made me think about my clients and friends who were also struggling to see the happiness in their lives.  Their well-being was suffering as a result of their negative experiences.

I realised many years ago that it's okay to have an off day, a bad week or the month from hell.  It can hit you in a single year and make you wish the ground would swallow you whole, but it does come to an end.  What I learned from the conversations with my clients is how important it is to balance the good and the bad so that we are not overwhelmed by our problems.

I thought about how I could help to lift their spirits and show them that the good fortune I was experiencing was also within their reach.  As Bob Proctor explains quite perfectly, 'thoughts become things, pick the good ones.'  We are able to pull positive things to us when we change our thoughts, by dwelling on the negatives we are simply asking for more of the same.

I put together a list that would hopefully change their thought pattern from negative to positive and give them the boost they needed - 15 Ways to Boost Your Well-Being.  I hope everyone finds some inspiration within this list and that it resonates with whatever is going on in your life.

What other people think about your situation, or you as a person, is their opinion and none of your business. 
Stop over analysing. 
Celebrate your own uniqueness and individuality.
Make peace with your past. 
Don't compare yourself/lifestyle to others.  You don't know what they are going through.
Trust that you are capable of achieving everything you want.
Believe in yourself.  Success starts on the inside and shows on the outside.  Dream It, Live It and Become It.
Live for the moment.  Meditation teaches you to be in the now.  'Now' is all you have so enjoy it and be happy.
Don't try to be something/someone that doesn't fit.  You shouldn't be scared to be your true self.
Remember how amazing you are.
'Only with your consent can someone make you feel inferior' Eleanor Roosevelt.
Time heals almost everything, allow yourself that time.
You can do anything you put your mind to.
Being positive is a choice - so choose it.
Surrender your worries, doubts and fears and know that you deserve the best life



I would love to hear your thoughts.  Going through a tough time can feel like you are coping with everything alone, but that isn't the case.  There are family members, friends, therapists and charities available to help.  Have the courage to ask for help if you need it - you may be surprised by the response you receive.  It's human nature to want to help others, so help and be helped.