#BookReview Moon Wisdom by Heather Roan Robbins


Author: Heather Roan Robbins
Category: Mind, Body, Spirit/Astrology

My Rating: 5 out of 5 stars

Review:

For the past couple of years, I have convinced myself that my emotions and overall mood has been linked to the moon cycle. After being diagnosed with severe depression last year I monitor my state of mind on a regular basis and try not to overwhelm myself with too many activities. I noticed that there were certain times of the month when I felt much lower than other times.

I decided to investigate this further and found Heather Roan Robbins’ book, Moon Wisdom, about transforming your life using the moon’s signs and cycles.

Heather explains how the moon sets the tone of the day and that it changes signs every two and a third days. By knowing where the moon is on any given day, you get a snapshot of the mood and general attitude for any particular day.

I didn’t want to use this book as a portent for my life – I’m savvy enough to carry on living my daily life as I always have and enjoying every second of it. What I did want, was an explanation as to why I had low moments when my depression beat me and I needed to hide under the duvet. I wanted a little guidance to sort through the muddle that is my mind. Moon Wisdom gave me this guidance.

At the start of the book there is a ‘how to use’ section which shows the reader where to go to find out what your moon sign is – you do need this information to be able to utilise the book. I found a great website http://lunarium.co.uk to use as I couldn’t quite get to grips with the site recommended in the book. I also downloaded the Solar Moon app for my iPhone which tells me at a glance what sign the moon is in. I am then able to refer to my book for a low-down on that day, for example; page 12: Navigate your day with the moon in Aries.

The second part of the book gives you information about the phase of the moon at the moment of your birth – I was born under a Libra moon and found the data to be quite insightful.

Part three describes the phases of the moon in more detail.

This is a full colour book and beautifully written. It is easy to navigate and read even if you are a beginner who is simply fascinated with the moon.

I would highly recommend.

Blurb:

Heather Roan Robbins believes how we respond to the Moon's powerful influence is key to how we lead our life. The Moon circles the Earth and zodiac in approximately 28 days and changes signs every 2.5 days. The Moon sets the tone of the day. When we know today's Moon sign, we know what to expect of the public mood and how to easily handle people. When we know the Moon we were born under, we have a new understanding of ourselves, what drives us, and what makes us feel at home. And when we know the Moon sign of our partner, boss or best friend, we have a beneficial tool to understand and get along smoothly with them.

In Part I, Heather explores the meaning and usefulness of the sign of the Moon each calendar day to help us navigate our day and make the most of our time. In Part II she explores the imprint of that sign and phase of the Moon at the moment of our birth, to better understand and deal effectively with ourselves and others. Part III layers in the effect of the phases of the Moon on our everyday life and on our birth Moon. From here we bring attention to the Moon's relationship to the other planets in our solar system, and how to use those important aspect-relationships to fine tune our planning.

Heather Roan Robbins shows how with the wisdom of the moon and its empowering guidance you can always choose your response and take charge of your life in a positive, healthy and proactive way!

 Amazon UK | US