It's been a hectic week at Resolution Challenge HQ. As many of you know, the month of November is when I take part in the annual NaNoWriMo contest - National Novel Writing Month. This is my fourth year of writing a 50,000 word novel in 30 days and so far (6 days in) I'm at just over 13,000 words. It's shaping up to be a good project, and one I hope to share with you all next year once the edits are done.

I'm delighted to have found my mojo again for writing motivational non-fiction, and this is evident in the exciting projects I've got coming up. My mind is bubbling over with ideas, and I’m struggling to get them all written down before my batty brain forgets them. There are several projects in the developmental stages and one in the OMG this might actually happen phase! I’ll keep you posted.

It’s nice to be feeling like my old self again. It’s been a main aim of mine for a while now, to try and
reclaim my sanity and rebuild my body, mind, and soul. I've had various treatments to try and help with this, such as Lava shell massage, reflexology, Reiki, and EMMETT, but for the past few months, I've been having acupuncture. This incredible therapy is helping me deal with my continuous symptoms and the emotional aspect of handling the sudden changes in my circumstances. Dealing with our issues on an emotional, physical, and spiritual level is important to re-balance our lives, and I hope by continuing with the acupuncture, I will be able to rebuild my body and mind.

Together with the physical therapies, I have also been working on several areas of my life using a variety of coaching tools, and have found it to be an incredibly helpful exercise. Always one to share my experiences, I thought I'd include a simple exercise for you to try and hope it resonates with your own journey.

Looking Back:

I hadn't fully appreciated the need to look back over the past few months when paving the way for a brighter future. Looking back is something I try to avoid, after all, mindfulness teaches us to live in the now, doesn't it? However, reflecting on past failures and achievements can teach us so much about the direction we want to go in.

Think back over the past ten months.

·         What made you smile?

·         What made you sad?

Jot your answers down in your journal or notebook. Is there anything you can learn about the goals you haven't yet achieved, or perhaps how you could celebrate if you managed to complete a project ahead of schedule?

Spend an hour reflecting on the months that have gone by and ask yourself what you would change, if anything. Can you do something different in the remaining two months to end 2016 on a high?

For me, the end of this year is all about embracing new opportunities and moving forward with determination and passion.

I visited the Mind, Body, Spirit Wellbeing Festival at the NEC, Birmingham this week. It was a fabulous exhibition. There were some incredible stallholders selling books, crystals, and other merchandise, together with a range of workshops and live talks on the main stage. I took part in a beautiful sound healing session in a Yurt with Anne Malone and had an excellent tarot reading with a beautiful soul called Ophelia. Her reading gave me hope and the confidence to look back over the past year to learn the powerful lessons my highs and lows have taught me.

Me and Anne Malone

Sound Healing Yurt




I’m no longer afraid of looking back and reflecting on the past. It has helped me work out what wasn’t working, who was draining my energy, and how I plan to achieve success in the coming year.

Try it for yourself and see what you can learn from a spot of reflection.

Getting my wings!


Connect with me:
Twitter: @ShelleyWilson72
Instagram: @authorslwilson
Facebook: Facebook.com/ResolutionChallenge
Sign up for my newsletter HERE.