Gimme an 'R'
Gimme an 'A'
Gimme a 'V'
Gimme an 'E'
    I am a member of quite a few clubs, but none shake their pom poms quite like Rave Review Book Club!
  It was through the power of twitter that I first connected with Nonnie, author of Daydream's Daughter, Nightmare's Friend.  She mentioned her aim to start a review club and I was happy to add my name, and debut book, to the list.
  That member list is now 400+ strong, with new recruits joining daily - that's a lot of pom poms!
  The RRBC is not a place to park your latest novel, sit back and wait for reviews and sales to roll in.  It's a proactive club, members retweet members, they buy and review each others books on Amazon, Goodreads and other platforms.  They support each other like no other club does via twitter and Facebook.
  The special features alone can catapult an indie author in to the spotlight - I know because I experienced it first hand!  #PushTuesday is when one lucky member is chosen at random to receive 24 hours of none stop support and promotion from fellow members.
  On my 'Push Tuesday' I lost count of the retweets, shout out's and new followers, I had hundreds of people actively selling my book for me.  You can't put a price on that kind of promotion.
  #PUSHTUESDAY AUTHOR!
 Today's #PUSHTUESDAY Winner is SHELLEY WILSON,
Author of "Wellbeing Workshop: Meditation - a beginner's guide"
(amazon.com/dp/B00G5D68VG).
We are so excited to honour her in this way. Today is Shelley's day,
so let's make it grand for her!
For the next 24-hours and beyond, please "PUSH" her by picking
up a copy of her book! Show your support of her on Twitter,
Facebook and any and every other social medium you utilise.
Be sure to always use the #PUSHTUESDAY hashtag so we are able to
recognise and NOTE your support!
Enjoy your "PUSH" @ShelleyWilson72 and Congratulations!!!
  Today's blog post is just another way I am able to promote myself thanks to RRBC.  If you like what you read then click here: VOTE NOW for my blog (voting CLOSED) - this goes in to a big pot of awesome authors and one of us has a chance to win the coveted prize of...'Spotlight Author'.
  This incredible accolade includes a full week of promotion and support, where your author bio and photograph are displayed on the RRBC website as well as being included on a Blog Tour, hosted by some of the wonderful members.  Go on...you know you want to vote for me!
  So how does the RRBC work if you're not an author but happen to LOVE reading books?  On the website there is a 'Book Club Selection' sub-heading (don't be alarmed by the copious number of tabs, each one is like finding a golden ticket to the Wonka factory!)
  If you scroll down the page on the Book Club Selection you will see an alphabetical list of all the author members and their books.  Pick one that takes your fancy, click the book link and you will be taken directly to Amazon (or another bookseller) to be able to purchase the book.  (NB: For UK readers, using my own book as an example, when you click the link to my Wellbeing Workshop: Meditation, A Beginner's Guide, if takes you to Amazon.com - look to the right of the screen and you will see an option to switch to Amazon.co.uk)
  The RRBC website is a mecca for authors and readers alike.  There is so much for the book lover to get their teeth into, this includes 'Book of the Month' as well as Writing Contests and Giveaways. 
  So, give your pom poms a shake and clear some space on your bookshelf...it's time to immerse yourself in the world of indie books and discover your next favourite author.
  "Thank you for joining me today, I am an indie author with my latest non-fiction book due out any day!  I am proud to support indie authors and you can help too by buying and reviewing our books on Amazon and Goodreads.  Happy reading, Shelley x"
  Looking to join the club?  Just click HERE it's free to join.
  Want to VOTE for my post, just one more CLICK and it's done!  Thank you.
(Voting Now Closed)
    LATEST RELEASE http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B00KAAUE88
  Straight-talking, honest and with touches of humour, Shelley Wilson shares her journey as she sets out to prove that being a 40-something, single mum with back fat and grey hairs isn't the end of life as we know it.
  From fighting flab to writing a 50,000 word novel in 30 days, Shelley covers a wide variety of themes as she tackles twelve challenges in twelve months.
  Packed with affirmations, tips, steps and links, How I Changed My Life in a Year will keep you motivated for the year to come and beyond.
    Photographs courtesy of www.freedigitalphoto.net
     