When I ran my Motivate Me workshops several years ago, there was an exercise I did that shocked many of the ladies sat in the audience.  It was an eye-opener for all of us and a simple visualisation of how we shouldn’t ‘wait for the right time’ before we follow our dreams or action our goals.
Try it for yourself:
Take a 100cm length of ribbon and a pair of scissors.
Now ask yourself the following question; “What is the estimated lifespan of an individual?”  When we did this exercise, my group decided that 80 years was about right.  The actual figure is 79 years so they were pretty close.  If you agree, cut 21cm off your ribbon and throw it away.
You now have a length of ribbon that is 79cm long, which if you are following my logic means we have 79 years of ribbon left, yes?  Stick with me…
How old are you?  I was born in 1972 so if I add 79 years to this date, I get 2051.  As I’m 44 this year, I would cut 44cm off my ribbon.  That leaves me with 35cm left.

1972 ------------------------ (79 years life expectancy)--------------------------2051
Let’s think for a moment about our weekends, this might be when we set aside time for family, seeing friends and socialising.  We probably won’t be working on our targets over the weekend, and what about all the time we spend asleep?  To cover this, I would need to cut a third off my ribbon.
My 35cm length of ribbon is now 11cm long.  That equates to 11 years.  If I started cutting off all the time I spend eating, travelling and on holiday, I would probably be left with about 9cm of ribbon.

9cm!  That means I have approximately 9 years to achieve everything I want.  Scared yet?

Of course, this is based on the fact that I live to be 79 years old.  Anyone who has lost a loved one, especially someone who was young and had their entire life ahead of them, will understand that the final destination isn’t set in stone.
In truth, we don’t know how much time we have left.
If you do this exercise for yourself, or with friends, I urge you to keep the small portion of ribbon you have left to act as a reminder that life is getting shorter and today is the day to live your dreams, accomplish your goals and live your life to the full.
I’d love to hear your thoughts on this so please leave me a comment in the box below.