Numerology has always fascinated me, and I’ve read as many books on the subject as I could find. I worked out my life path number quite a few years ago (it’s a 3 by the way) and found the description of a three-person to be pretty spot on for me.

When Hay House brought out their ‘Hay House Basics’ series, I jumped at the chance to add their version of Numerology to my growing collection. Numerology: Discover Your Future, Life Purpose and Destiny from your Birth Date and Name by Michelle Buchanan is just one book in a growing catalogue of back to basics mind, body, and spirit books ranging from Angels to the Qabalah, and Astrology to Tarot.

The author, Michelle Buchanan is a numerologist and Certified Law of Attraction Practitioner who studied numerology for more than 20 years. She was formerly the spiritual counselor for Woman’s Day magazine in New Zealand, as well as the resident numerologist for Television New Zealand’s Good Morning. Michelle has a numerology show, Numerology Guidance, on Hay House Radio and provides personal readings, workshops, and seminars to clients all over the world. She is also a talented singer/songwriter and dedicated mother of two based in Auckland, New Zealand. You can find Michelle on her website HERE.

With a difficult couple of years behind me, I’m had periods of feeling out of sorts, and a bit lost. I am still trying to find my way and recapture that passion and drive that has motivated me for so long. Using numerology to discover my life purpose and destiny seemed like a good place to start! Would it show me an alternative route, or confirm that I’m still on my proper path? Armed with a notebook to jot down the relevant dates and corresponding numbers I began.

The opening section of the book gets you to work out the following numbers:

Life Path – Who you are, life purpose, the path you walk in this life.
Destiny – Who you are destined to become.
Soul – Who your soul desires you to be so it feels content and complete.
Personality – How others perceive you.
Maturity – Your future potential, where your life is steering you from age 45+
Birth Day – Additional personality traits, talents, and abilities.
Current Name – The vibration you project to the world when you use this name.
Karmic Lessons

I found the karmic lessons to be quite interesting. By working out all your other numbers, you see which, if any, number/s are missing, and these are your karmic lessons. For me, it was two and four which meant I needed to be more patient and considerate, as well as being more disciplined and focused. There was more to it than that, but I could resonate clearly with the messages.

The next sections are split into numbers, and you can read the corresponding unit that applies to you. For example, my maturity number was 1, in the Number 1 chapter I looked up the section for maturity, and it told me what it meant to have this number – You are on course to become an independent individual from the age of 45 (or may well already be well on your way). Yep, I’d say that was accurate!

The next section guides you to calculate your personal year/month/day numbers. The personal year number is a great way to discover the best times to take action, move house, get married, study, or travel. The number changes every year so you would need to work this out regularly to find out what your life lessons are for that particular year. I worked out 2016 and 2017 to see if next year was going to be an improvement, this is what I got:

To work out the number you add up your birth day and the current year, so mine would be 24th May 2016 = 2 + 4 + 5 + 2 + 0 + 1 + 6 = 20 (2 + 0) = 2 (the aim is to get down to a single figure unless you have 11, 22, 33 in your numbers then there is a host of other rules).

For 2017 it would be 2 + 4 + 5 + 2 + 0 + 1 + 7 = 21 = 2 + 1 = 3 (my 2017 number is 3)

2016 (I was a 2) – patience, relationships, balance, emotions.

2017 (I was a 3) – socialisation, self-expression, communication, creativity.

At a glance, I can see that next year is going to be a better one for me. It might not mean anything to you other than a vague list, but it resonates exactly with everything I’ve gone through in 2016. My illness and depression have forced me to slow down and be patient with myself; it’s stirred up a host of emotions that I’ve struggled to deal with at times (balance), and I’ve found out who my true friends are throughout this experience. The number sections are very in-depth, and I know I’ll be referring to them often.

Along with your yearly numbers, you can also work out your month numbers by adding your personal year number (2017 was a 3 for me) to the month number (January = 1, February = 2, etc.) So, for me, January 2017 is 3 + 1 = a 4 month which means I need to work on building, planning, order, and effort.

At the end of the book, there is a section dedicated to working out the numerology of your name. I loved this part of the book and ended up working out the numbers for my three children, my cat, and my book titles, which was incredibly interesting.  

My non-fiction book, How I Changed My Life in a Year continues to sell well for me after nearly three years in the bestseller charts. I calculated the number for this title, which came out at a 6 and read the corresponding message.

Name number 6 = promotes harmony, healing, and love. It’s the ideal number for anything creative, or that relates to teaching, coaching, and counseling endeavors. An ideal number for writers. This is also a good number for a home-based business.

Boom! I didn’t calculate the number before publishing that book, but it was certainly spot on, imagine what you could achieve if you created a title to fit a specific number!

For regular readers of this blog, you’ll notice I’ve had a mini re-brand and changed the name from Resolution Challenge to Motivate Me! I thought I’d check the number and guess what, it came out at a 6 too! The title of my next non-fiction book (which will be out next year) came out as a 7 = promotes personal development and higher learning. It’s the ideal number for anything educational or spiritual. It’s a good number for anything that involves research, studying, or strategizing. Boom – again!

Using this book and calculating my various numbers has been a great boost to my spirits, confidence, and emotions. I’m feeling much more positive about next year and excited about my blog and writing.

Interestingly, this book has also helped me to take a step back at home with my children. My middle son is currently preparing to sit his final exams. He doesn’t know what he wants to do going forward (A-Levels or BTEC) and it’s been a bit stressful. I’m fairly creative, and so is my eldest son (graphic designer) and my youngest daughter (wants to go into theatrical make-up). When I calculated my son’s life path number he was a 1 – independent individual, would make an ideal business owner, manager, team leader, executive. When I stopped trying to push my fluffy and creative brainwaves onto him, he was able to tell me that he liked the idea of doing business A-Level. Not my kind of thing, but then I’m an artistic 3 who likes to entertain! We are all unique and need to find our proper path, as a mum it can be hard to support your children and not guide, or push them down the wrong track. Stress levels have now reduced, and my son has some idea of what he’s aiming for and appears to be much happier about it.

Thanks to Hay House and Michelle for such a great book. Even if you aren’t into numerology in a big way, this book is worth reading purely for the entertainment value. I’d highly recommend it.

BUY a copy from Amazon UK or Amazon US

Blurb:

Discover the fascinating metaphysical system of numerology, and how it can support you to understand yourself better and make the right choices for you in every area of your life.

This book explores:

how numerology can help you
how to read a chart
your personality numbers - your Life Path, Destiny, Soul and Birth Day numbers - and what they all mean!
your forecasting numbers and how you can use them to look at the year ahead and the energies it holds for you

...and much more!