In 2015 the Mind Body Spirit Wellbeing Festival arrived in Birmingham. For me, this was a huge bonus as I live a mere ten minutes away from the National Exhibition Centre, so there was no early morning train to London, or late evening return loaded down with shopping bags and good intentions. My favourite festival was on my doorstep!

This year, I’m more excited than usual but not for the reasons I mentioned above, no, this year I’m actually taking part in the Wellbeing Festival!

If you’ve never attended a Mind Body Spirit festival before, then you’re in for a treat. These exhibitions cater to all your personal development needs:

Wellbeing studio - where you can take part in taster sessions hosted by some of the UK’s best Yoga teachers.

Wellbeing Spa – the perfect place to relax and unwind with Birmingham’s top therapists.

Live Stage – A range of musical and artistic performances as well as live demonstrations.

Mantra Lounge – Join Anne Malone, for meditation sessions and sound experiences.

Exhibitors – A huge array of stalls, organisations, and therapists are signed up to tempt you with books, organic beauty products, handmade jewellery, crystals, yoga supplies and readings.

As if that wasn’t enough to fill every personal development requirement you have, there is also the Workshop area.

The workshop programme has a marvellous mix of international workshop leaders and teachers. Each workshop offering new ideas on Inspired Living, NLP, Feng Shui, Science and Angels, Meditation, and much more.

For more information about the incredible line-up of workshops, and to purchase your tickets, pop along to the website.

Kicking off the entire programme of events is the ‘fabulous four’, bestselling afterlife author, Theresa Cheung, respected medium and spiritualist, Claire Broad, book blogger and Arbonne beauty and wellbeing expert, Kim Nash, and inspirational blog of the year winner, Shelley Wilson.

I’m so excited about standing up on stage and sharing my story with the attendees of this impressive exhibition. Our topic is ‘Finding Heaven’ and the four of us will be entertaining our audience with a little bit of Heaven on Earth followed by the Staircase to Heaven, and showing you how easy it is to achieve if you believe.

It’s going to be a fabulous event, full of inspiration, motivation, and laughter.

If you want to join, Theresa, Claire, Kim, and myself then you’ll find us onstage between 10.30am – 12.30pm on Friday 4th November 2016. Tickets are £17 per person and can be purchased HERE.

I sincerely hope you join us for this excellent workshop – see you there x

Theresa Cheung
Claire Broad
Kim Nash
Shelley Wilson