On Monday 15th May the GCSEs begin here in the UK. I blogged about this very topic three years ago when my eldest son sat his exams, and now the time has arrived for my middle son to do the same.

My original blog wasn’t about the stress and strain on our youngsters as they study hard, worry about the process, and ponder on their fragile future, no, it was aimed at the thousands of parents who have to live in the same house as that teenager! Yes, I’m sharing it once again. A parent’s survival guide to exams and revision.

Everything has changed. The world is a very different place for our sixteen year old and, of course, your teen will never believe that you were also sixteen once. They truly believe you were born in your forties! I hope the following guide is of some help and that we all make it through alive – good luck to you all.
Ensure the fridge is fully stocked. You many have survived on three meals a day, but your teen requires five meals, twelve snack breaks, and a weekly takeaway.
Stock up on A6 sheets of paper, highlighters, and Blu-Tac – be prepared to find the walls of your living room, kitchen, bathroom and hall covered in mind maps.
Set aside an equipment drawer and fill it with new black pens, pencils, rulers and a spare calculator. The night before they sit their first exam you WILL be told that all these items have been mislaid.
Herd all other siblings and the elderly to another part of the house to avoid any TRI’s (tantrum-related-injuries).
Approach with extreme caution when you explain to your teen that ten minute revision, followed by forty-five minute rest is not what the teacher had in mind when they said ‘take regular breaks.'
FIFA 17 does not count towards PE revision, no matter what they tell you.
When your sulky, withdrawn teen arrives at a melt-down point, be ready to tell them to suck it up and get on with it, but at no point utter the words ‘back in my day…’
Pull the plug on the electricity at 11 pm telling your teen there must be a power cut. Shrug your shoulders (they understand this universal action) and manoeuvre your teen to bed suggesting they take advantage of an early night.
Use all the willpower you can muster to avoid nagging about revision – you can lead a horse to water...
Forget everything you remember about being sixteen. Save yourself the ridicule and eye rolls by letting your teen believe they are the first of their species to sit an exam.
Your role as a parent is about to be tested – remember to offer plenty of support, and when (if) the devil horns on your teens head shrink momentarily, go in for an occasional hug and remind them you love them no matter what.
Good luck to all the parents out there who are living through this pre-exam stage. My thoughts and prayers are with you all at this difficult time. ;-)

Thanks for visiting my blog, I hope you enjoyed this post. Want more? Connect with me here:  Twitter @ShelleyWilson72, Instagram or check out my Facebook pages http://www.facebook.com/FantasyAuthorSLWilson and http://www.facebook.com/MotivateMeBlog. You can also find me on Pinterest