Way back in the depths of winter I decided to cheer myself up by pre-booking a summer holiday.  It gave me something to look forward to when the weather was grey, and my mood was even darker. 

As I chomped my way through the mince pies and turkey leftovers, I believed that the extra weight I was carrying would be a distant memory by the time my holiday arrived.  Fast forward seven months and my stomach still wobbles when I walk, my boobs get in the way when I bend over to tie my shoelaces and don’t get me started on bat wings!

There is a personal development tool that I should have used to motivate myself toward that bikini fit body.  A technique that can show you what your hopes and wishes will look like, and guide you to make the right choices to manifest them.  That technique is Vision Boarding.

I’ve written about vision boards before as they are one of my favourite personal development tools.  I love the simplicity and the creativity. 

  To ready myself for the summer, all I needed to do was create a healthy eating board that would highlight all the positive areas and keep me motivated toward my goal of a bikini fit beach body.  As it happens, I got so caught up in publishing my latest book that I let my own personal development slide.  On the plus side, my latest book just happens to be; Vision Boards for Beginners. 

I intend to enjoy my summer holiday, wobbly bits and all, but I am already planning my vision board for September.  The autumn brings with it a sense of new beginnings, as schools and colleges return, and clubs and courses start up again. 

A board, dedicated to what I hope to achieve for the remainder of 2015, will keep me on track with my desires and aid me in manifesting the things I want.  They act as a visual reminder of what we want to be, do and have in our lives.

If you are interested in finding out how to create and integrate vision boards into your life, then grab a copy of my latest ‘handbag mentor’.  Vision Boards for Beginners is the second in my Wellbeing Workshop Series of books that help you dip your toe into self-help and personal development.
  I would be interested to hear about your favourite self-help tools for staying motivated.  Whether that's for weight loss, fitness, or personal/business reasons, share your tips with my readers.
  Vision Boards for Beginners (Book 2 in the Wellbeing Workshop Series)
Available as eBook or Paperback from Amazon.
  UK: http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B0106A0D3C
  USA: http://www.amazon.com/dp/B0106A0D3C

 
 
 