The school holidays have started for us, and we were greeted this morning with blue skies and sunshine.

Unfortunately I am fighting a viral infection which means I am not at my best and able to enjoy this spring sunshine.  It's on days like this I'm so glad I don't run a YouTube Channel, at least when I write my blog posts I can type in my pyjama's!

So with a week of doctor visits, blood tests, skin rashes and an overflowing pile of tissues, I thought I would share a few pictures with you instead of trying to engage my brain and connect words or sentences.

On Tuesday I completed one of the challenges - my 100 Happy Days.

If you didn't read the post about this particular task then you can take a look at it here.

The basic plan was to post a photograph of something that made you happy, every day, for 100 days, using the hashtag #100HappyDays.

Here are a few of the things that made me smile over the past 100 days...

A de-clutter session uncovered a priceless find,
just need to find a cassette player now!
 

A slice of homemade cake made by my client, Ann Sherlock,
with a lovely cup of tea in my favourite mug!
 
  A trip to London and my first Writing Workshop
with Writers' & Artists at Bloomsbury.
    A FREE chocolate bar always makes me happy!
    A visit to the new Birmingham Library.
    Finding a Fairy Labyrinth at Conkers
    Helping my Mum on her stall at the BB Boutique
Children's Craft Fayre
    Found these in my local Co-op and they
definitely made me happy!
    Another challenge done!
      I hope you enjoyed my quick picture of happiness.  Why not start your own 100HappyDays challenge, you can start at anytime.  Log on to http://100happydays.com to find out more.
    I'd love to hear from you if you are taking part in this challenge - how are you doing?
  Feel free to share you top tips for happiness or indeed viruses!  All I need now if for my blog to go viral and I'll be so 'Happy' :-)
    Photo's courtesy of Freedigitalnet and my twitter page! Connect with me http://www.twitter.com/ShelleyWilson72
  ﻿            