This week I celebrated one of my greatest achievements.  The sixth birthday of my holistic health business, Body & Soul Holistics.

So much has changed in six years.  My business has made many twists and turns along the way.  As a newbie entrepreneur, I assumed that I needed to offer as many treatments as I could.  I spent huge sums of money and precious time training in everything from the metamorphic technique to waxing.

I hated waxing!  I have a huge amount of respect for all the therapists out there who rip hairs off people's body parts day and night, but it wasn't for me!  Of course, to drop a treatment after you had paid for the course and dedicated hours to training and case studies was a sin, or so I thought.

The further along my spiritual/business journey I travelled, I began to realise that it was okay to walk away from the parts of my job that weren't working for me.  If they weren't adding benefit to my personal journey then why did I keep them in my life?  I took waxing off my treatment list, along with spray tans and facials.

Before long I noticed a shift in the clients I was attracting.  Like-minded souls who were looking for a holistic/alternative way to feel better about themselves or heal some aspect of their life.

Reiki and reflexology appointments filled my diary, and I finally felt a huge sense of contentment.  A peace settled over me and my business as I found the groove I was meant to be in - alternative health and well-being.

Alternative therapies, meditation and my spiritual training had all helped me to build my confidence and self-esteem after I left my abusive marriage.  To then be able to help others from the lessons I had learnt was hugely fulfilling.

Four years ago I embarked on my teaching qualification for adult learners.  For my 'mock lesson' exam, I taught the group how to use a dowsing crystal pendulum.  When the exam adjudicator wanted to join in I realised then that the tools I used every day in my treatments were the perfect starting point for my teaching. 

I began writing personal development workshops; introduction to crystal therapy, vision boarding and even understanding oracle cards.  My love of what I did for a living and my ability to talk for England were the perfect combinations.  I also introduced meditation classes and now ran three groups alongside my treatments; I love writing my meditation scripts and finding that inner peace.

Some would argue that I've had luck on my side; others would say my Guardian Angel guides me.  I believe the hard work, dedication and the power of positive thought can manifest our reality.  By releasing the negative aspects of my business and concentrating fully on what worked, I attracted more of the same.

My clients are incredible women (I decided at the very beginning that I wanted to run a ladies' only spa).  They are strong, funny, passionate, hard working, loyal and charismatic.  I love them all dearly and thank each and every one of them for sticking with me over the past six years.

My ladies keep my feet firmly on the ground.  They tell me what works and what doesn't, and they support me in every possible way.  I count my blessings every day.

To complete my sixth birthday celebration, I shared the cake with one of my meditation classes.  We did manage to squeeze a quick 'OM' in between slices!

I'd like to share some of the lessons I've learnt over the past six years - they also transfer quite nicely to life in general!

Walk away from what doesn't work for you.
Work smarter, not harder.
As a small business you may feel alone - you're not.  Network and find a local support group.
In the beginning don't be afraid of 'free time'/gaps in the diary, you'll cherish this in a few years.
Don't be afraid of change - it can open the doors you thought impossible.
Enjoy yourself - love what you do/do what you love.  If you don't wake up with a smile and a positive attitude then are you doing what you truly desire?

If you have any other tips which you feel would benefit anyone looking to start a business or wanting to move from hobbyist to entrepreneur, please share it with us in the comments below.