A couple of weeks ago I shared a post about Numerology and Lucky Charms; you can read that here http://myresolutionchallenge.blogspot.co.uk/2015/02/looking-at-numerology-and-lucky-charms.html

I am a great believer in reading the signs around you.  Of course, this may be my inner writer looking for a new story arc, either way we are sent messages on a regular basis.  It’s up to us to tune in and hear them or carry on regardless.

When I host my vision board workshops, I help students tap into those messages to create a vision of how they would like their life to be.  If you are interested in learning more about Vision Boards you can read about them here http://myresolutionchallenge.blogspot.co.uk/2014/01/a-new-vision-for-new-year.html

At the start of each year, I prepare a board for all the exciting things I want to achieve, be, have or work on during the next twelve months.  I’ve done this for years, and I continue to be astounded at how varied my boards are from year to year. 

 2014 was a busy one for me and with an overloaded work schedule I burnt out around Christmas.  I took some time off and, although the festive season is normally busy, I was able to chill out and spend quality time with my children.  It was at this time I decided to work on my 2015 board.

 

As you can see from the photograph, I didn’t get very far.  All the plans I had for evolving my holistic business, running my new courses and expanding my training ground to a halt when I looked at the board I had created.

It was a sign.  My sub-conscious seemed to know what I needed, but my body also responded.  The end-of-year burnout manifested as a physical ailment, and I was forced to stop. 

One of the most helpful self-help books I have on my shelf is Louise Hay’s; You Can Heal Your Life.  This bestselling book is packed full of strategies for changing the way you think.  It looks at limiting thoughts and how our ideas can control us.  It also provides a key to understanding the root of a physical ailment.

The list contains a ‘problem’ such as anxiety, then there is a ‘probable cause’.  For anxiety, this is ‘not trusting the flow and the process of life’.  Finally, Louise offers a ‘new thought pattern’ - an affirmation that you can repeat as and when you need it, and change your thought process.  For anxiety, the new thought pattern is, ‘I love and approve of myself, and I trust the process of life.  I am safe’.

I have used this book for years; on myself, my children and my clients.  It can give another side to a story when you are trying to help someone deal with a physical issue.

Over the past couple of months, I have had numerous tests, MRI scans, and hospital visits.  I knew that I was being guided to slow down, but I couldn’t figure out why.  I turned to Louise’s book to see if I could shed any light on my physical issues.

According to the list, I need to look at how I support myself.  I should be embracing my life experiences, and releasing fear.  I have a tendency to give my power away (something from my past that I constantly need to work on), and I must learn that I can’t always control everything.

Where do I start?  I understand that this will be a work in progress and may take time, but when it comes to health and well-being we must take that time and commit ourselves one hundred percent to achieving balance once more.  As I often tell my clients, ‘you can’t fix others if you are broken’.

So my vision board remains unfinished, but I have an incredible team of medical staff, family and friends supporting me.  As you know, I do love a good challenge – this one may be slightly more unusual than a zip wire though! 

By slowing down, I have begun to notice more signs around me.  It may be a passage in a book that resonates with me, or a quote I see on Facebook.  Before I sat down to write this blog post, I saw an image quote posted on Psychic Medium, Michelle Russell’s page. 
  'Sometimes the smallest step in the right direction ends up
being the biggest step of your life.  Tip toe is you must, but take the step.'
  Signs like this are what you need to look out for.  Song lyrics, number sequences, books you are drawn to or people who keep popping up in your life at specific times.

I have some important decisions to make over the next few weeks, and I will be looking around me for those ever present guides to help me heal myself.

  Do you notice these signs?  Can you feel yourself being guided by unseen hands? I’d love to hear your thoughts.

    Signpost Photograph courtesy of Suphakit73 at freedigitalphotos.net 