I've been blogging for three years now and I love it! I write this blog as well as a book/writing related blog over on Word Press - you can find it HERE.

The blogging and writing community is fabulous, and I’ve made many new friends through sharing, interacting and commenting on the incredible blogs that are out there.

To celebrate the best bloggers around, Sacha Black and her awesome team launched the Annual Blogger Bash back in 2015, and I’ve very pleased to say that it’s returning this year and looks to be bigger and better than before.


The physical event takes place on 11th June 2016 in London and tickets can be found HERE. Regular blog readers who are unable to make the event can follow all the fun and frivolity via Twitter or Facebook.

What does this mean for you, the reader? Well, I’m glad you asked – the event includes the Annual Blogger Bash Awards (ABBAs for short), and you get to vote for your favourite blogs. 

The categories are as follows: (Image and information are taken from Sacha Black’sBlog)

Best Overall Blog - This award is for the blogger who has the best overall blog. Who is the blogger that for you, excels in a variety of categories? Perhaps they’re sociable and engage with readers, maybe they share others posts, or have a writing style that keeps you coming back time and time again.Whoever you choose needs to be an all-rounder, a blogger that for you is head and shoulders above the rest.

Funniest Blogger - Which blogger continually makes you laugh out loud? Has someone made you laugh so hard you cried? Maybe you snorted drink through your nose at one of their jokes. Who’s the funniest blogger of them all.

Most Inspirational Blogger - Who consistently inspires you? Is there a blogger that’s thought provoking and inquisitive? Or perhaps they have become a muse to you with constant provision of inspirational content or imagery? Who’s the one blogger that’s touched your heart? This is the nomination for them. 

Best Dressed Blog - This is for the most stylish blog. Who’s blog looks sleek and sexy? Maybe they use stunning imagery or a well-designed theme, or perhaps they just have a unique written style to their blog posts. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, so only you can judge whose blog is the best dressed.

Most Informative (Original Content) Blogger - This award is for those bloggers with the most informative original content. Who, time and time again writes fascinating content. Perhaps they are a history blogger, maybe, a blogger who writes about writing craft, or maybe they like archaeology or wine tasting, or perhaps they are an artist or musician. The topic could be anything, what were looking for is a blogger who shares a wealth of knowledge that they have carefully researched and pulled together themselves.Who do you find yourself longing to read because of their content? This is the nomination for them.

Best Book Review Blog - We created a new award because we felt there were so many dedicated book reviewers out there that they needed an award in their own right.Which book reviewer do you love? This isn’t about being prolific this is about quality reviews. Who’s the most thoughtful reviewer? Perhaps their thoughts on a book persuaded you to read it, maybe they use their blog as a platform for authors as well, or perhaps you love them for their scathing honesty!Whoever you choose to nominate for this award, please ensure their blogs are PRIMARILY book review blogs.

Services to Bloggers - Who’s the kindest blogger of them all? Which blogger goes out of their way to help others? Maybe someone helped you kick-start your blog with tutorials, or maybe they continually reblog your posts. Perhaps someone consistently provides useful posts on how to boost your own blog. Or maybe you want to nominate someone who provides a platform for others.Who do you want to thank for their dedication to other bloggers?

Hidden Gem - Which blog doesn’t get the notoriety they deserve? Maybe you stumbled upon them by chance and discovered a minefield of information. Maybe they make you smile or have such an original style you can’t help but go back.Who would you like to have the limelight for a change? This is the award for them.

Newcomer Award - This is for bloggers who have been blogging less than a year. So bloggers who joined the blogosphere after 1st June 2015Who joined the blogosphere with a bang? Perhaps they are funny, or well designed, or maybe their posts make you smile time after time. Whatever the reason, this is for a newbie blogger that you think deserves recognition.

Best Pal - Which blogger do you want to go to the pub with? Or maybe have dinner with? Who never fails to reply to comments, and has thoughtful things to say. Maybe they encourage the community through weekly challenges or blog parties. Who wouldn’t the blogging world be the same without?

Voting is now OPEN. So, get nominating and celebrate your favourite blogs by getting involved. (Check out Sacha's blog for details on submitting your votes)



I’m fortunate enough to be attending the Blogger Bash in London and looking forward to meeting my favourite bloggers in the flesh! I will be adding a post about the whole event later in the year.



Get involved, get voting and follow the fun. The awards are not just for Word Press blogs, but for all platforms so please feel free to share this event with your blogger pals. Want to know more? Check out Sacha's FAQ HERE.