Project You!


Week 2: Don’t Feel So Guilty

Last week we looked at how to stop trying to please everyone else and to take time out for yourself, you can read that post HERE.

Today, I want to talk about guilt. We all carry a certain amount of guilt around with us. It’s healthy to feel a small portion of responsibility or remorse. Telling your kids you can’t afford an ice-cream (because you’re secretly saving for a spa weekend) comes with only a small sliver of shame.

But what about the guilty pleasures? No, I’m not talking about Johnny Depp (for once!), I’m referring to the duvet day you dream about, or that unscheduled pit stop in life when you binge watch all eight Harry Potter films.

We long for space in time to read a trashy celebrity magazine, or re-watch a favourite Friends episode for the millionth time.  Perhaps our guilty pleasure is a large slice of Victoria sponge cake that goes un-pointed or syn free.

What I want you to do is stop for a moment and ask yourself why these things make you feel so guilty. What’s wrong with relishing those stolen moments?

In the distant past, I put off reading for pleasure because I knew my ex-husband believed I should be cleaning, cooking or seeing to our children – yes, he was that kind of man! Taking an hour to read a book couldn’t be justified, so it was swept aside as a frivolous act.

Today, I not only read voraciously but I am also a member of a well-known book review team. I no longer see time spent with my nose in a book as frivolous, I see it as essential.

Your mental and physical health centres on your personal needs being met. Whether that’s having a creative outlet or being in a relaxed environment, either way, it’s an essential part of your well-being. Allowing yourself small pleasures such as a slice of cake or a chick flick is vital to your state of mind.

So, bin the guilt, switch off your phone and claim that small pleasure. Your family, friends and inner self will thank you for it because you’ll emerge from your guilt free cocoon renewed and raring to go.
Enjoy x