My mum and I regularly attend the Hobbycraft show at Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre in time for Christmas.  Mum stocks up on her crafty bits and bobs and I carry the bags!  It's become a mother-daughter tradition and regardless of the aching muscles and swollen feet, it's a tradition we both enjoy.

The demonstrators on the stands are quite amazing, many of them can be seen on the Create and Craft Show, they can whip up a stunning card in minutes using embellishments, glitter glue and a partridge in a pear tree.  They make it look so easy.

My mum is of the same breed.  I remember as a child watching her make amazing cakes for customers birthdays and weddings, homemade jams and marzipan fruits.  She then discovered crafting and never looked back, abandoning the oven for Gelli Plates and Distress Inks.

So as my December challenge is all about making things for Christmas I decided to see if mum's creative gene was hereditary.

One of my favourite stands at the show is Lavinia Stamps.  As an avid fantasy enthusiast I am always drawn to the displays of twinkling faeries, full moons, playful elves and mystical doorways - in fact, if Tracey ever developed a wallpaper range I'd be first in line!

The Lavinia Stamps website is packed with inspiration, sample videos, galleries and projects.  You can also watch Lavinia Stamps on YouTube and really get your creative juices flowing. 

We all know how fond I am of challenges and I was happy to see the Lavinia Monthly Challenge Blog in full swing.  You can follow on their facebook page and send your own entries to be in with a chance to win £40 worth of Lavinia goodies.

It was as I attempted to re-create some of the stunning cards from the website that I realised mum's creativity gene had skipped a generation!  My little cards may well be hidden at the back of the window ledge but I had a lot of fun getting messy with inks, stamps and glue.

I think I'm going to enjoy my December challenge...


I know I have an abundance of creative readers so it's over to you guys - what have you made that you are proud of?

Do you make your own Christmas cards or presents?