Clutching a bag of popcorn in her small hand she gazed up at the expanse of painted stars; vibrant shades of yellow, blue, green and pink covered the ceiling.
The sweet scent of toffee apples mingled with the woody aroma of the sawdust under her feet and as the lights dimmed her eyes grew wide with wonder...

Can you remember your first trip to the Circus?

On Saturday 20th April it's the 4th World Circus Day.  What are you doing to celebrate?

Join In or Hold Your Own Event
Log on to World Circus Day website to find out about Circus events in your part of the world, take the kids to a show or hold your own event at home with your pet as the star!  There are so many events planned across the globe so you are sure to find something. 

Hold a 'Mocktail' Party
As my April challenge is all about giving up alcohol I thought it would be fun to include a mocktail party as part of our Circus celebrations.  Following on from my impromptu moment of stardom on stage with 'Patchy the Clown' at Paulos Circus, I asked you to send me your Big Top related mocktails and I have picked my favourites from the many I received.  Thank you to everyone who emailed me with their suggestions.

'Flying Fairbrother' from Tracey Mason

In a shaker half-filled with ice, combine 2oz grapefruit juice, 1oz orange juice, 1oz cranberry juice and 1 tsp of honey.  Shake well.  Strain into a Collins glass almost filled with ice cubes and top with 3oz ginger beer.  Stir well and enjoy.

'Lion Tamer' from Brenda Wilson

Cut 1 small watermelon into chunks and freeze overnight.  When fully frozen, blend with 2 1/2 cups of almond milk in a blender until smooth.  Pour into a glass and garnish with sprigs of mint and enjoy.



'Coco the Clown' from Amanda Thomas

Drizzle some fudge sauce around the rim of a martini glass.  Blend 2oz chocolate ice cream, 1 can of coconut cream and crushed ice for 2 mintues in a blender until smooth.  Pour into the prepared glass and enjoy.


*** BOOK GIVEAWAY ***

If you can't make any of the events planned then don't despair as I have an amazing treat for you.

To celebrate World Circus Day, Julia Douglas is giving away a free download of her circus novel The Showman's Girl.  The Showman's Girl follows the adventures of a girl who runs away with the circus in the 1930s and falls in love with the charismatic showman Adam Strand, a man seemingly
torn between his wife, the daredevil wirewalker Jayne, and Molly, the elephant trainer.  Julia Douglas is the author of Nashville Cinderella, Closer! and The Fairground Girl.  The Showman's Girl, which will normally retail around £4.99, is available to my blog readers FREE at https://itunes.apple.com/gb/book/the-showmans-girl/id639618472?mt=11  for a whole month.

Grab your copy today!

I love to hear your feedback, don't forget when you are posting a comment to choose a 'Comment As' format from the selection box such as a Google Account.