My topic for this week was going to be about living in the now.  However, I can’t stop thinking about at an exciting future event, or the past event that allowed this future event to happen – you still with me?  To summarise - I haven’t got a hope in hell of living in the moment, at the moment.


Is that a bad thing?  I don’t think so.  When time allows, I enjoy nothing more than being silent, or absorbing myself in a task such as walking, drawing, crafts or my writing.  Each of these activities enables me to be in the now, and I feel so much better for it. 


For today though I am somewhere else!

  The reason for my abandonment of all things meditative is, in my opinion, a just and valid cause.


On Thursday 26th February, my debut teen fantasy novel, Guardians of the Dead will be released as an eBook and Paperback. 
   
So as I try to be the calm, fully balanced individual that my holistic clients and non-fiction readers are used to, I am failing in gigantic proportions.  Fortunately, my clients/readers are fully equipped to cope with the fluctuating emoji’s of my life.  My friends and family are also fairly adept at ducking and weaving with my constantly evolving timeline, which leaves me – and you!  I can only apologise and invite you along for the ride J


To celebrate the book launch I am hosting a virtual party – no, I hadn’t heard of them before either, but apparently they are a huge amount of fun.  I have attended quite a few twitter parties and thoroughly enjoyed these events so I am hoping that a party with more than 140 characters will also be a blast.


As it is a virtual event, this means I can invite anyone from across the globe and we can all party in our PJ’s and slippers.  If you would like to attend then simply follow the link and join the guest list.  The party will be held on Thursday 26th February and starts at 7pm UTC.  As I write for young adults, there’s no need to bring a bottle, however, ‘mocktails’ and ‘smoothies’ would be gratefully received.

  I guess I will be living in the now during the party as I entertain my guests with trivia, games and virtual cupcakes.  It’s just a matter of perspective.


I look forward to seeing you all at my Facebook Book Launch Party. 

What tools have you used to promote a new product or service?