My 'Do Something I've Never Done Before' month is going very well, however, I seem to have the knack of fitting extra curricular activities in to the schedule. 

During the first week of May I pottered in the garden and created a gorgeous fairy garden (which is blooming nicely!)  Last week I tackled the sewing machine and embarked on a quilting 101 quest. 

This week I had decided to calm my antics slightly and enjoy a girlie pamper session  - definitely something I've never done before as I am such a tomboy - but prior to my lash-tastic hour of bliss I was faced with the daunting task of putting together a mountain of flat-pack furniture. 

Allow me to explain!  My daughter is away with school for a week and I thought this would be the perfect opportunity to redecorate her bedroom as a surprise.  At the time it didn't cross my mind just how much work this would entail but as the cardboard boxes kept arriving my stress levels began to peek!  The fourteen packages included a corner wardrobe, a triple wardrobe, a double wardrobe, a bed side cabinet, a desk and a single ottoman bed!

Phew!  I'm exhausted just reading about it. 

Flat packs can be a challenge at the best of times but with just three days to build, paint and dress the room I realised I had bitten off a little more than I could chew. 

It was one of my lovely clients who suggested that I use this experience as part of my blog, 'how often do you flat pack?' she asked.  So true.  So my 'sixty minute makeover' became part of my resolution challenge. 

I must say I felt a huge sense of satisfaction when it was finished and I know my daughter will squeal with delight when she gets home.  My hands are covered in blisters, my knees are creaking in a most alarming manner and every inch of my body aches but this challenge was definitely worth the blood, sweat and tears.

So finally, after the last of the empty boxes were recycled, I could concentrate on my original plan and enjoy a girlie pamper session with Ellie from Solihull based 'Beauty by Ellie'.

Dressed in my joggers and t-shirt (I must invest in a frock!) I reclined on my spa couch and turned my stunted little lashes over to a very talented beautician.  It wasn't what I expected - in fact I would highly recommend eyelash extensions purely for the relaxation of it.  I would have nodded off if my good friend, Sarah hadn't been primed as star photographer and kept prodding me for my next shot!

It was pain free, quick and relaxing and I found it highly amusing when Ellie brushed my new long lashes with her tiny lash comb! 

So here you go:- 
Before...


  During...


 After!
    Long luscious lashes looking lovely!  What do you think? 
  How many of you are girlie girls and enjoy regular pamper sessions?  Or how many flat pack kings and queens are out there?  Let me know, I'd love to hear your thoughts and stories.
    Remember to choose a 'Comment As' from the drop down menu so we can all read your flat pack, lash-tastic tales, until next week. x