Touched by an angel during a NeurOptimal session

This is a genuine story that happened in my private practice Neuro-Insight only last April 2016.

How does the story go? Well, let me start the story where it began…
.
In December 2015 I received a call for help with NeurOptimal Neurofeedback (what else…?) from a 51 year old lady who hadn’t been able to sleep well since 2007. As she had been telling me, without any significant reason. Let me tell you, as an experienced coach and NeurOptimal trainer, I was sure that something must have happened in that year, and, I also knew that the lady would tell me within 10 sessions.
She appeared to be a very hard working person with lots of interests in doing things, and in other people. She is the kind of person who would take everyones’ crap on her shoulders including her own, trying to solve and help in the same order. She also told me she was oversensitive to smell, sounds and so on….. During four weeks she took  four sessions, and, after the fourth sessions she reported she noticed she could sleep 5 hours without waking in between. For her, that was an major breaktrough. After the 7th session, she walked in happily because she had been able to say ‘no’ to a questions that came from work. She said no to working late for a collegue who was ill. During her 8th NeurOptimal session she started to cry, it just happened. She couldn’t stop. I handed her tissues, without asking or saying anything, just allowing this to happen. You see, as a NeurOptimal trainer I just know that things will be emerging, and, this was definitely happening at that particular moment….

After the session the lady asked me if she could share what had happened. So she did….”You see, Hannie, today, exactly at this hour, it has been 7 years ago since my brother passed away in an accident. And, I never realized it, but now I see that I have been feeling that I was robbed from my brother that day. I never had the chance to say goodbye to him, and I miss him immensely…During the session I could smell his presence, I could feel his touch and I heard him saying that he is alright, and that this is the time for me to let go my feelings of guilt and go on with my life, exploring my gift of being a sensitive person.” “I was touched by an angel, who is my brother.” Thank you for that, as if I hadn’t had these NeurOptimal sessions with you, I am sure this would never, ever have happened.”

Hannie Ruinen
hannie.ruinen@neuroptimal.com
info@neuro-insight.eu
www.neuro-insight.eu