Neurofeedback saved my life...

Over thirteen years ago, it now feels ages but, back then, it was my nightmare. After I gave birth to my third child, I was caught by sever post-partum depression. And I mean, I was really caught by it. Life didn't feel what it felt before. Everything blurred, emotions running up and down and not being able to handle life AT ALL. 

Everything was messed-up inside my head...my brain was completely shut down...I got lost in the city I had been living in for 22 years....I could not have a small conversation...I felt like a living death....with a baby, a toddler and a 4 year old....

I had a nurse with me during the day and she helped me with everything, simply because I wasn't able to do anything. I could not believe this was happening to me. I mean, I am a well-educated and happy person. No reason to feel like that, and still I did. Day after day, week after week, month after month passed by. I became desperate, and so did my husband. Because I had decided not to use any medication we were constantly looking at alternatives to recover from this dreadfull family situation.

One year later, the baby-girl had grown into a wonderful one-year-old happy girl, not aware of the state her mother, I, was in. It happened one year later. One year of misery inside my brain, lost the will to live....One year later I accidentaly ran into someone who owned a NeurOptimal system (Back then it was still called NeuroCare). He offered me a session....

I do believe in miracles, because, the moment the session was over, and it was just ONE session, I could already notice the difference. A little bit of sunshine was able to get through my massive brainfog...One sunray....

It made me come back for more....I had nine sessions, and that was it: I was back in charge! And more, I decided I had to have NeurOptimal in my home, simply because I wanted to become even better, not being aware that, now, twelve years after that very difficult time, I would run a private practise offering NeurOptimal Neurofeedback as a tool for my work as a therapist. Every day I enjoy using the system, now in order to help others. 

If I hadn't NeurOptimal in my life, I probably would not have wanted to live....It was a life-saver for me, and, after so many years and so many clients, it probably has saved more lives than mine alone.

Hannie.  Read more on my website
I still train my own brain twice a week :) 