 Here is my story.... February 13th 2016 my daughter got struck by a CVA. Something clothed in her brain, and we were horrified by seeing her being half paralysed within a couple of seconds. The weeks that followed were intense. Our happy and clever girl had changed from am A+ student into a slow and silent girl within a moment. She kept repeating that she wanted to have a ukelele. At that moment we did not have a clue why, but, we bought her one. She could listen to mp3s all day, without any word or movement. Processing information was hard for her, and she was so tired....sooo extremely tired. Our worries were immensely you can figure that. After a month, half March or so, she told us she had learned to play a song on her new instrument...it was I can't help falling in love with you...when we asked were she had heard the song, she said, on YouTube, Twenty One Pilots. So, we started watching it, as she played along. It was the only thing she could process at that time: music, especially from the band! After a couple of weeks she got accepted in a rehabilitation program. She had to work her body three times a week. And, had speech therapy as well. She also trained her brain with NeurOptimal neurofeedback. As I am working as a practioner myself, that was easy to facilitate. Riding her bicycle was difficult, but necessary (we live in The Netherlands, were everyone uses the bike to get from a to b....so, it is a basic thing here that you need.....she kept practising and practising. One day I heard her play the piano! She had learned to play the piano, and, all the songs of twenty one pilots just came out of her hands. I was astounded by this. Then she asked if she could go to a concert and if I would buy her a ticket. In May she was recovering more and more, and, I managed to get my hands on tickets for the Emotional Roadtour in Düsseldorf Germany, in November. At that moment it seemed that it would take ages, and I was worried she would not feel well enough to go....that summer she learned all the lyrics by heart and she could sing along and rap with all the songs. September came, and I had begun to listen to the band as well, and I was amazed by the energy that grabbed me. I am a trained musician, keyboard playing and drumming mother, and it had been a long time ago since I had been caught by music like that. From that moment on I became a cliquemom, and, yes, we went to the concert, my girl was in the pit. It was a moment I will never forget. She became so much alive through  their music, and, she is still not completely well, but, she is ALIVE! So am I, and happy and proud of my girl. For all of you who sometimes feel you need a little bit of support, be proud yourself and find comfort in being part of this friendly group! For Josh and Tyler...thank you guys for sharing your creativity and great music. Now I am emotional.....and grateful. Haagje.