A recent newspaper article, A Lifeline For Widowed Fathers - by Jane E. Brody - New York Times addressed an important need for fathers who are widowed due to cancer.  According to Ms. Brody, more fathers are widowed due to cancer more than any other illness.


Fathers Widowed Due to Cancer Often Experience Social and Emotional Isolation

Fathers Widowed Due to Cancer Often Experience Social and Emotional Isolation
In her article, Ms. Brody discusses the social and emotional isolation that these fathers experience after their spouses die.  Not only are they dealing with their own loss, but they must also help their children to deal with the loss of their loss, raise the children on their own, and try to maintain some semblance of normalcy in the household under traumatic circumstances.

A Support Group for Fathers Widowed Due to Cancer 
Ms. Brody indicates that a medical doctor, Dr. Donald Lee Rosenstein and a psychologist, Dr. Justin Michael Yopp, of the University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill) formed a support group for fathers who are widowed due to cancer.

Fathers Who Participated in the Support Group Found Hope

Fathers Widowed Due to Cancer Found Hope and Support
According to Ms. Brody, fathers who had been suffering on their own found mutual support among other fathers who were going through many of the same emotions and everyday challenges that they were facing.  It also helped these fathers, according to Ms. Brody, overcome the loneliness that people experience when they lose their spouse.

The article indicates that Dr. Rosenstein and Dr. Yopp are hoping to expand the support groups to other area of the country.



Fathers Widowed Due to Cancer Can Find Moments of Joy Again

To Find Out More About Support Groups for Widowed Fathers Due to Cancer
If you or someone you know might be interested in finding out more about these support groups, click on this link for more information:  Single Fathers Due to Cancer.

You can also look into support groups at the American Cancer Society.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist.

I work with individual adults and couples.

To find out more about me, visit my website: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006 or email me: josephineolivia@aol.com


photo credit: gwilmore via photopin cc

photo credit: KONCENSUS via photopin cc

photo credit: Phil Dowsing Creative via photopin cc