As a psychotherapist in NYC who is interested in the mind-body connection, I often see clients who want to participate in a mind-body oriented psychotherapy like Somatic Experiencing, clinical hypnosis or EMDR. 

Often, this is a new experience for clients and they need guidance as to how to tune into their bodies to discover what their bodies are trying to tell them. With some practice, most people can learn to tap into the mind-body connection, which is usually a deeper and more reliable source of inner wisdom than just relying on what we think.

Tapping into the Inner Wisdom of the Mind-Body Connection
Tapping into the Inner Wisdom of the Mind-Body Connection
When clients begin to tap into the inner wisdom of their mind-body connection, they're often amazed at what they discover about themselves. To a certain extent, most of us have accessed this connection at some point in our lives. When we say, "I had a 'gut feeling' " about a certain situation, whether we realize or not, we're tapping into our mind-body connection to access our inner emotional world where we often know intuitively what's right for us.

Somatic Experiencing and EMDR help you to tune into what your body is telling you
Somatic Experiencing and EMDR
When we learn to use Somatic Experiencing, with practice, we can often tune into internal images, colors, symbols, and meanings that aren't usually available to us in regular "talk therapy." Depending upon what problems clients are coming in to work on, of course, "talk therapy" can be valuable in helping them resolve their issues. However, I usually find that Somatic Experiencing, EMDR, and clinical hypnosis are much more effective in working with trauma than just "talk therapy" alone.

If you're interested in learning more about Somatic Experiencing, I recommend reading either of Peter Levine's books,  In an Unspoken Voice: How the Body Releases Trauma and Restores Goodness. Dr. Levine writes in an interesting and accessible way. You can also go to the Somatic Experiencing website: Somatic Experiencing Training Institute to get more information.

To find out more about clinical hypnosis, also called hypnotherapy, you can visit the website of the American Society of Clinical Hypnosis: ASCH

To find out more about EMDR, which was developed in the 1980s by Francine Shapiro, Ph.D., you can visit the EMDR website: EMDRIA.  You can also read Francine Sharpiro's self help book, Getting Past Your Past - Self Help Techniques.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist with expertise in clinical hypnosis, Somatic Experiencing, and EMDR.


I work with individual adults and couples.


To find out more about me, visit my website:  Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist


To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006.




photo credit: YIM Hafiz via photopin cc

photo credit: Venu Dharmaji (a bit busy...) via photopin cc