We haven't written about involuntary psychiatric treatment on Shrink Rap for a while because it gets our readers really stirred up.  Now I'm going to try to stir you up.
 
ClinkShrink and I are talking about writing a book on the different perspectives of involuntary hospitalization -- we'd like to put both sides of the argument on the page and look at issues related to patients' rights as well as families, members of the law enforcement and legal systems, and the doctors, nurses and hospital staff.  Roy is involved in his techy projects and won't be in on this, though we will continue to get his input and to eat pizza and crabcakes with him.

We're at the point where we need a "sample" chapter to illustrate what it is we are trying to write.  This isn't going to be a real chapter in the book (I don't think), but just "here's the idea."  Because the actual chapters will entail a great deal of interviewing and reviewing medical records and speaking with people and their families, I'm looking for an easier way to begin the process, and truthfully, the idea was inspired by our Shrink Rap readers who have written in over the years with stories about how they were damaged by what occurred during their involuntary hospital stays.   It got us thinking that there have to be better ways, while at the same time, it seems that it's shameful that our society leaves terribly psychotic people living on the streets and eating from the garbage because there is no way to treat them.  Maybe if treatment were nicer?

So I need your help.  I need someone with a really good, detailed story to be the subject of my sample chapter.  Will you tell us your story in the comment section, or email it to us at Shrinkrapblog at g mail dot com?  The comment section might be nice because it would allow for others to dialogue.  We don't need your name, but please don't write as Anonymous because I won't be able to the stories straight, a nickname is fine, and you can sign in to Google as "anonymous" as long as you sign the entry with some name that distinguishes you from the others.  Also, I might want to speak with you later, so if that's not acceptable, then maybe you don't want to participate. 

 For the sake of the sample chapter, I would like to hear from people who feel they've been treated badly.  The "so glad they committed me, it saved my life" is for another chapter.  If you're a psychiatrist and you have a patient who feels they've been unduly traumatized by an inpatient admission, please see if they want to participate, and the same goes for family members.  Obviously, books are about stories, and the stories need to be compelling.  

Years ago, we did a poll, and I was struck by the fact that two-thirds of those who had been involuntarily hospitalized said they would not want to be hospitalized again, even if they were a danger to themselves or others. 
 
In advance, thank you so much.

Thank you in advance.