Sleep is natural and essential to maintaining our physical and emotional health. When we sleep, our bodies and minds restore themselves. We also have at least 5-7 dreams at night where our unconscious minds often come up with creative solutions to problems or integrate whatever has gone on that day. Most people need about eight hours of sleep to function well. However, there are so many people who are having problems with insomnia--problems with either falling or staying asleep.

Sleep Hygiene:
If you are among the millions of people who, at one time or another, have problems sleeping, there are things that you can do to improve your sleep. Among them, make sure that you are engaging in good sleep hygiene. The following are some tips to improve your sleep hygiene, which in turn, could improve your sleep:

Limit your intake of caffeine, including coffee, tea and soda
Limit your intake of alcohol: Many people think that having a drink or two before bed helps them to sleep. However, alcohol is a stimulant as well as a depressant, so having a couple of drinks before bedtime might make you sleepy or more relaxed initially; however, when the stimulant aspect of alcohol kicks in, it's going to wake you up.
Don't eat a big meal before going to bed. It will keep you up.
Make sure that you are sleeping in a room that is dark. If you fall asleep with the lights on or with the TV or computer on, your body will think that it's daytime and you will wake up.
Don't listen to the news or read the newspaper before going to bed because this might also keep you up, worrying about what you have seen or read in the news.
Don't engage in vigorous exercise just before going to bed because this will be overstimulating to your body and keep you up.
Make sure that you are sleeping on a comfortable mattress, neither to soft or too hard
Don't do work or go on line while you're in bed because this gives your unconscious mind the signal that going to bed is a time to be alert. The bed is for sleep and sex.
Don't have arguments in bed with your partner as this will also tell your unconscious mind that you need to be alert and awake, and you'll have problems sleeping.
Have a wind- down routine that you engage in before going to sleep, whether it involves gentle stretching, meditation, listening to relaxing music or whatever you find soothing.

How Clinical Hypnosis Can Help You to Overcome Insomnia
If you use these sleep hygiene tips and you still find that you're suffering with insomnia, you could benefit from clinical hypnosis to overcome your sleep problem. Clinical hypnosis (also known as hypnotherapy) accesses your unconscious mind and can help you in a safe and effective way (without taking medication) to have a deep and restful sleep.

I am a psychotherapist and hypnotherapist in NYC. To find out more about me, please visit my web site http://www.josephine-ferraro.com.

Feel free to call me at (212) 726-1006 for a consultation.