I've had a long day and it felt like every one was pretty troubled. I'm trying to decide who to give credit to for the 'quote of the day.' I started by thinking it might go to the person who informed me that I looked good (always nice to hear) and then added that usually I look sick and I've gained some weight. Okay, I'm not sure what to do with that one.

I've decided, instead, that I liked the remark posted by blogging psychiatrist Doug Bremmer in the comment section of my post Tell Your Doctor if You Experience Any of the Following....

He writes:
Doug Bremner (MD) said...
As a "blogging doctor" I am struck by how much anger there is out there about side effects of antidepressant medications, and how much psychiatrists are felt to be to blame for that. Perhaps there has been over-promotion of prescription medications. But there are side effects that we don't know about and only learn about with longer experience. We are not magicians or mind readers.
I do often feel when I read our comments from readers who've had bad experiences with medications or hospitalizations or psychiatrists who say insensitive things, that people feel there is something purposeful about it. It's hard when someone comes in and describes something as a side effect of the medication and I recall that the symptom was there before the medication was even started. With time, we've learned that this can be the case-- if a patient starting an SSRI now says "this medication is making me feel more suicidal," Docs listen. It's still hard when someone says a medicine causes a side effect never described and I don't know what to do with it. Sometimes I try to talk people into staying on their medication if, for example, they complain that a newly added anti-depressant is making them more depressed-- the medicines take time to work, weeks in fact. If a patient continues to complain, eventually I'm left to conclude that this medication either doesn't work or isn't tolerated in this person. Sometimes people complain bitterly about side effects while at the same time they say they feel the medication helps, and then I say: It's up to you. It gets trying when this means that every visit consists of stopping a medication that hasn't been given a fair chance only to begin another medication-- the arsenal of medications available can be run through pretty quickly with this strategy and it doesn't make sense. Okay, I'm rambling.