Dear Readers:

Over the course of the summer, three of my novels have become available on Kindle/Amazon.  Kindle allows for a few days of free promotional downloads, so I wanted to let you know that all the books are available at no cost for just a brief time.

Double Billing is the story of a woman whose life changes when she discovers she has an identical twin she never knew existed. It's a short book and is intended to be a quick read.  It will be available as a free download from Thursday 9/27 through Monday 10/1.

Mitch & Wendy : Lost in Adventure Land is  about two siblings who are struggling with their relationships in the aftermath of their parents' divorce. The story takes place on Wendy's 10th birthday when the kids get lost in an amusement park, only to learn they are being followed by a man who knows all about them from Mitch's misguided Facebook life.  Written for 3-5th graders, or the very young at heart.  It will be available as a free download from Thursday 9/27 through Monday 10/1.

Home Inspection is a story told through psychotherapy sessions in a format that is similar to the HBO series In Treatment. Dr. Julius Strand is a psychiatrist who plods along in his already-lived life until two of his patients inspire him through their own struggles to find love. It will be available as a free download on Thursday September 27th only, and for 99 cents from 9/28-10/1.

If you don't own a Kindle, you can install a free Kindle app on your computer, tablet, or cell phone by going here.
All three books are also available as as paperbacks from Amazon.

Rather than giving different links to all these books and formats, there is a single link to my Amazon page with all the options here.

In non-fiction news, Shrink Rap: Three Psychiatrists Explain Their Work, written with Clink and Roy, will be released as an audio-book very soon.  It remains available in hardcover/softcover/Kindle/Nook, but so far, Hopkins Press has not felt inspired to give it away for free.  The three of us are very pleased with the enthusiastic reviews it has gotten.

I'm more than happy to have people download my novels at no cost -- I'll be keeping the doctor day gig -- so please tell/tweet/blog/share the free promotions to anyone you think might be interested.

Finally, If you do read any of the books, please consider putting a review on Amazon.  
Thank you so much,
 Dinah
The Accessible Psychiatry Project