Dear Readers,

First, don't miss our anniversary Podcast, #17-- scroll down for the show notes (and that great photo of our feet).

Send your submissions to mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom.
We plan to do a My Three Shrinks podcast about the submitted posts, as well. If you'd like to also submit up-to a 30-second audio to us, please do, and we may just include it in the podcast. (Just make an .mp3 and send it as an attachment... I'll leave it to you to figure out how.)


It is only fitting that we will be first hosting Grand Rounds (5/1) right after the first anniversary of starting Shrink Rap. In case you want to check out last week's (4/18) Grand Rounds, go to Fat Doctor. For this week's (4/25) Grand Rounds, go to Med Valley High.

What is Grand Rounds? To the uninitiated, the term "Grand Rounds" was traditionally a bedside teaching session for physicians. Instead of the regular, daily rounds which were conducted by individual physicians caring for their patients, at Grand Rounds a physician would bring a patient to a lecture hall, surrounded by scores of their peers and students, to be educated about a particular disease, evaluation method, or procedure. More recently, it has been a lecture sans patient about a particular medical topic.

Nick Genes, of Blorborygmi, started an online version of Grand Rounds back in September, 2004 (here's the schedule of past and current GR). It's mission is to "introduce a wider audience to the expanding array of talented doctors, nurses, techs and students writing online today.
" Various health care-related blogs have taken weekly turns collecting submissions for Grand Rounds, collating them into a cohesive group, then introducing them to the wider internet audience for all to read, learn, and be amused.

Grand Rounds at Shrink Rap:

BYOB (Bring Your Own Brain)



It is our turn this week, so here are the submission guidelines.

Deadline is Saturday night (April 28, 2007) at midnight PST (that's 3AM Sunday for us Easterners). We reserve the right to include stragglers, but no promises, okay?

We intend to include all appropriate submissions. We just don't have the heart selecting the top 30; and, besides, can you imagine the three of agreeing on which ones to include?

We will show a strong preference for highlighting posts with any kind of relevance to psychiatry/mental health/neuroscience/brain/behavior topics.

Please keep this in mind as you write posts this week or submit recent posts (the more current, the better). (If you really want to score brownie points, also relate it to quacking fowl.)


Send your submissions to mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom.

We will have our Grand Rounds up on Tuesday, May 1. See you then.
-Dinah, ClinkShrink, and Roy

P.S.: We plan to do a My Three Shrinks podcast about the submitted posts, as well. If you'd like to also submit up-to a 30-second audio to us, please do, and we may just include it in the podcast. (Just make an .mp3 and send it as an attachment... I'll leave it to you to figure out how.) Warning: this is Roy's idea... Dinah and Clink are trying to talk him out of it.



Brains...Must ...Have...Brains