This is our 1036th post.

I want to ask you a question: Has Shrink Rap changed your attitudes?

Why do I ask? Well, you know we've been here writing about psychiatry and ducks and chocolate and rock climbing and technology for a while (follow Roy on Twitter ....oh, and I've gotten very good on an iTouch game called Fireball). We're thinking about the book we're writing and thinking about ways to keep Shrink Rap and the assort Shrink Rap-related activities fresh. I'm thinking about why we do this and what impact it's had, if any. ClinkShrink likes educating people about her important work with inmates and about how psychiatry and legal matters intersect. Roy likes fiddling with technology and talking about medications and we all like the idea of decreasing stigma and making psychiatric issues more understandable and accessible. I like trying to put what happens in psychotherapy into words, and this is hard. It's really hard, and I don't know that I do so well at it. So how are we doing and how has this helped or hurt?

I think we've talked about it before, but Shrink Rap has changed my life. I love blogging. I like the writing. I like the discussions. I like thinking about things to blog about during my day. I like the interactions I have with readers and the friendship I have with Clink & Roy. I like chatting with Fat Doctor on Facebook. I'm not so taken with Twitter, but I'm still kind of feeling it out. I like podcasting, mostly for the chili, but hummus is good and cake is great. If Oprah picks up our book, I'm going on a diet before we're on the show.

And Shrink Rap has been teaching me a lot, too. I've gotten insights into patient's thoughts and concerns that never come out in therapy. Many of them have been very encouraging, and sometimes they confirm what I already thought. Some of them have been jarring-- I've learned a lot about how angry people can be with psychiatrists and how trapped they sometimes feel: with therapists they don't like, with illnesses they feel their doctors should have been more powerfully able to heal. I've learned, too, that some patients/readers/commenters have very high, and even unrealistic, expectations of their psychiatrists. I love reading comments, but sometimes I'm surprised when I find myself feeling quite defensive, or thinking about something a reader said for a long time. Sometimes I wonder if we, as bloggers, have become a place for people to vent their anger towards their own psychiatrists. And sometimes I'm shocked to read about things people say happens with their own psychiatrists.

At some point, I imagine the three of us will want to talk about the role technology takes in psychiatry-- about education and stigma, and anything else that pops to mind for blogging/podcasting/twittering/book-writing shrinks. It might be helpful if we knew how we impacted you, in good ways and bad, and if you're getting anything out of this endeavor.
Might you click on "post a comment" and tell us?

Aside from that, I dreamt last night that I was sitting in on a psychotherapy session-- the therapist was Gina (Diane Weist) from HBO's In Treatment, and the patient was a psychiatrist I haven't spoken to in at least 10 years. Hmmmmm.....