[30] . . . [31] . . . [32] . . . [All]
Here is the little "podette" I mentioned last time. The next podcast, which will come out in the next day or so, features a special guest, Doctor Anonymous.



August 20, 2007: #31 Biteproof Gloves



Topics include:
Q&A: from Midwife with a Knife: Short version: How would you manage an agitated, aggressive patient in your OB/GYN office?

[Okay, here's the long version: Let's say I have this patient who's clearly distressed and obviously psychotic (if I can tell, it's pretty obvious) who's caretaker reports that they're seriously considering hurting themselves or others, clearly the patient needs to be sent to the psych ed/crisis center/whatever hospital equivalent for evaluation by an actual mental health provider... So, after the caretaker says to us, "I'm worried about taking her back to the group home, I'm think she's planning to hurt someone there.", and I talk with the patient who says something to the effect of, "I know that woman's planning to take my baby, and I'm going to hurt her before she gets the chance." I make the decision that she needs to be emergently evaluated. I try to talk her into going voluntarily (mostly by saying things like, "You seem pretty upset, I think it might help if you went and talked with the doctors downstairs", she refuses, and security is called to escort her down to the psych ed. Eventually, (I think triggered by the stress of that situation and the chaos of a busy clinic and the security officer's arrival), and in an attempt to leave the room (I happened to be sitting between her and the door), she kind of half tackled/half grabbed/half pushed me (Maybe to push me out of the way? I think she was just trying to leave. I don't think she was really trying to hurt me), the security officer grabbed her, she bit him (although he was wearing biteproof gloves) and she eventually was taken to psych. My question for you guys is, how do you psychiatrists recommend those sorts of situations be handled?

So, we answer the question in the podcast. We also speculate about "bite-proof gloves."
Oh, and if you want to see a funny but very strange rendition of Zappa's Peaches and Regalia -- with a man using his ungloved but cupped hands as a musical instrument -- then do check out this YouTube video (turn down your volume first). I could not stop laughing.






Find show notes with links at: http://mythreeshrinks.com/. The address to send us your Q&A's is there, as well.

This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.
Thank you for listening.