Psychotherapy Daily News features articles about mental health, science, health, education plus more from various sources, including New York Time, Yoga Journal, the Harvard Business Review, GoodTherapy.com, Psychiatric Times as well as some of my own psychotherapy-related articles.

Here are a list of some of the articles in today's Psychotherapy Daily News:
Interpersonal Neurobiology in the Consulting Room With Dan Siegel
Psychiatrists With Ethics Training Less Likely to Push Brand-Name Drugs
Managing Suicide Risk of Clients With Borderline Personality Disorder
Emotional Demands:  The Exhaustive Effect on Technology Workers
Sugar Addiction and Mental Health:  America Needs Rehab
Does Religion Help You Quit Smoking?
Find Your Authentic Self and You Just Might Find Your Next Career
Starting Therapy--and Ending It Too
Reasons for Substance Use Predicts Treatment Outcome in Adolescents
EMDR Self Help Book:  Getting Past Your Past
Feeling Lonely in a Relationship
Can You Read the Face of Victory?
Th 28-Day Meditation Challenge Returns on February 1
Why You Should Emphasize Your Potential Rather Than Your Achievements on Your CV
It's Time to Cut Back on Social Media
What Capitalism Can't Fix
May I Be Happy?
Long Term Effects of Life Expectancy From Smoking
Addiction in the Home:  Healing Lives, Families and Communities
It's My Job and I'll Tweet If I Want To
Tips For Managing and Preventing Stress
Science News From Around the Web
Krishna Das Nominated For Grammy Award
Stop Underage Drinking - Gateway to Federal Resources
Study Links Cognitive Deficits and Hearing Loss
Positive Psychology News Daily
You can subscribe for free by clicking on this link:Psychotherapy Daily News and clicking on the word "subscribe" so you don't miss an issue.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist.

I work with individual adults and couples.

To find out more about me, visit my web site:  
Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist.

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006.

Visit Psychotherapy Daily News for the latest information about mental health issues.