For most of us, making changes can be challenging, especially when they involve major life transitions.  When we think about making a change, we might go back and forth, not knowing what to do. It is not unusual to have mixed feelings about making a transition, even when we know that it would be best for us to do.

Fear of Change


For instance, if we know that we have outgrown our current job and we need a change, it is often painful to face this. We might procrastinate taking the necessary steps--whether it involves going for additional training or education or starting a job search, because we might fear the unknown:

What will happen if I leave my secure (but boring) job?

What if it turns out to be a bad decision?"

What if I don't succeed?

And on and on until we are paralyzed into inaction.

It often helps to be able to talk to trusted friends and family members, especially if they have gone through their own life transitions successfully.

But sometimes family and friends don't know what to say or, worse still, their own fear of change might cause them to advise you not to make any changes.

The other possibility is that, after a while, they might get tired of hearing you go back and forth about a decision and they won't know how to get you "unstuck" so you can overcome the obstacles that are keeping you from changing.

At that point, it would be helpful to seek help from a professional who has assisted clients to overcome the psychological blocks that keep you stuck.

Ask yourself:

How would I feel if I continued to be stuck in this situation for another year? another two years? or five years?

What if I allowed my fear and mixed feelings to keep me stuck indefinitely?

Would I look back at my life and say: If only I had made that change when I was younger, maybe I would be where I wanted to be today?

I've been helping people to overcome the obstacles that keep them from making positive changes in their lives since 1996.

I work in a supportive and empathic way to help clients to maximize their potential.

Don't allow fear and ambivalence keep you emotionally paralyzed.


I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist.  I work with individual adults and children.

To find out more about me, please visit my website: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist

For a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006 or email me: josephineolivia@aol.com


Top photo credit: Stuck in Customs via photopin cc

Bottom photo credit: Eddi van W. via photopin cc