There are times when you "just don't feel right"and it's hard to put your feelings into words.  You just know that something is wrong.  Not being able to put words to your feelings can be especially frustrating if you can't attribute your feelings to any particular event or memory in your life.



When You "Just Don't Feel Right" and It's Hard to Put Your Feelings Into Words
You're Not Alone
If this is happening to you, you're not alone.  Not being able to put uncomfortable feelings into words is a common problem.

Many people who have this experience think they need to know what's wrong before they come to therapy.  Then, aside from not feeling right, they often feel ashamed of not being able to explain what's happening to them.

You Don't Need to Be Able to Explain What's Wrong to Start Therapy
But it's important for you to know that in order to benefit from therapy, you don't need to be able to explain what's wrong.  A skilled therapist can help you to explore your feelings, discover the source of your problems, and help you to work through these issues.

The Mind-Body Connection
As a psychotherapist, I'm very interested in the mind-body connection, which is why I use clinical hypnosis, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing with clients.

When you learn to connect what's going on in your mind with what's going on in your body, it becomes easier to discover the source of your uncomfortable feelings and work through the problem.

You always have your body as a resource, and once you develop the skills necessary to tap into that resource, it's something that you'll always have, even when you leave therapy.

Using mind-body oriented psychotherapy isn't just an intellectual process, like many forms of talk therapy.  It's an integrated combination of your entire internal experience as well as what might be happening for you now or your memories from the past.

Mind-Body Oriented Psychotherapy:  Clinical Hypnosis, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing
When I use mind-body oriented psychotherapy, like clinical hypnosis, EMDR or Somatic Experiencing, I continue to help clients to connect with their unconscious process, the experience you're having that might be outside of your every day awareness.

I'm psychoanalytically trained, and exploring the unconscious is an important part of my work.

Finding Out More About Mind-Body Oriented Psychotherapy
If you're curious about mind-body oriented psychotherapy, like clinical hypnosis, EMDR or Somatic Experiencing, take a look at the links I've provided below.

Getting Help
You can also set up a consultation with me by calling me at my NYC office:  (212) 726-1006.


Free Yourself From the Emotional Pain that Keeps You Trapped

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist.

To find out more about me, visit my website:  
Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist, Hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing Therapist

I work with individual adults and couples.

Resources:
To find out more about:
Clinical Hypnosis:  ASCH - American Society for Clinical Hypnosis
Somatic Experiencing:  Somatic Experiencing Training Institute
EMDR: EMDR International Association

photo credit: ChrisHConnelly via photopin cc

photo credit: Alain Bachellier via photopin cc

photo credit: AlicePopkorn via photopin cc