Maybe you're concerned about the health risks. Maybe your partner has complained about your smoking. Perhaps your doctor has advised you to stop. Maybe you're concerned about the cost of cigarettes. Perhaps you're concerned about the effect of secondary smoke on your family. Whatever the reasons, most smokers consider giving up smoking at least once in their lives.

Smoking is a physical as well as a psychological habit
Smoking is both a physical and a psychological habit. Even after the nicotine has left a smoker's system, the psychological cravings can be very strong. For many smokers, smoking is a way to cope with stress, upset, anger, sadness, and other uncomfortable feelings. Some smokers smoke when they're bored. For others, smoking is associated with pleasant activities like eating, drinking, driving, socializing, and having sex. For many people, giving up smoking is like giving up a friend. Some clients have told me that when they're smoking, it's the only time that they feel relaxed because, aside from the nicotine, it's the only time that they inhale deeply. Other people have said that when they get together with buddies and smoke, it's a bonding experience.

Why stop smoking?
If smoking is so pleasurable, why give it up? Most of us are aware that smoking places us at greater risk for heart attacks, cancer, and respiratory diseases like emphysema. Maybe we even know someone who has suffered the ill effects of smoking. Most people are also concerned about the effects of secondary smoke on their loved ones. If you've tried to stop smoking before and have relapsed, you know it can be challenging, especially when you're under a lot of stress.

Stop smoking with Hypnosis
The good news is that you can learn to recognize the various triggers that cause you to pick up a cigarette in different situations and develop better coping skills so that you no longer crave cigarettes. You can do this without using drugs that might have side effects or using nicotine patches or nicotine gum. Hypnosis is a safe, natural and effective way to give up smoking, usually in only 3-4 sessions.

I am a psychotherapist and hypnotherapist in NYC. If you would like to learn how to become a nonsmoker, please feel free to call me at (212) 726-1006. You can also visit my web site: http://www.josephine-ferraro.com.