Woo-woo! We made ten bucks! Some kind, anonymous reader (I think it is the one who's been yankin' our chain lately... thanks, bud!) made a donation in our virtual tip jar for 10 bucks. I really didn't expect anything to come of this. (Excuse me but gotta go use my steroid nasal spray... allergy time.)

Some of you may have noticed that I added an Amazon Giving button at the bottom of our sidebar a few weeks ago. This is a nifty way for people to contribute to a website they like, even as little as a dollar.

Why do we -- three U.S.-trained, working physicians -- want to panhandle on the internet for pocket change? We can afford $5 per month for the bandwidth costs (Siteground: 900GB per month!! Best deal on the Net!), or a C-note for a microphone (insert affiliate link here). I wasn't really sure why I did it, but I think I figured it out. It's like putting money in the hat of a street performer.

But then I saw this interview on Rocketboom. The two guys who dreamed up lonelygirl15 -- one is an attorney (Greg Goodfried) and the other a surgeon (Miles Beckett) -- left their safe, professional, paying jobs so that they could devote all their time to LG15.com, their new website where visitors can interact with Bree (lonelygirl15) and other not-real characters. For this they expect to eventually be able to cash in bigtime, with their 1.5 million views per week (hey! we get 1.5 thousand, so watch out Greg & Miles).

So I am now in-f'n-spired. I have handed in my resignation as Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry at Bigtime Medical Center so that I can devote all my time to MyThreeShrinks.com. That's right! In two weeks, I'll be unencumbered so that I can spend all my time devoted to improving our $ite for our loyal readers. So start clicking that button, folks. Every 108 minutes.

Oh, sure, Wife was surprised. Even a little upset (I think she's jealous). But then I showed her how just by clicking a button, millions of readers can contribute $1, $2, even $10 each. That really adds up. I could tell by the look on her face that I convinced her that this is the real deal. In fact, she's on the phone right now, even as I'm typing this, calling her attorney (probably to get advice on how to handle the coming tidal wave of cash).

Maybe I'll add some virtual shrinks for visitors to talk to. Like lonelyshrink42. Or Eliza. Or Max. We'll do a daily videocast, like Dr. Anonymous did (but talk faster, with shorter pauses).

This is gonna be big! Look at those visit counters spin.


What's that, Wife? Someone's here for me? Whoa, check that out! There's a car with flashing lights outside... probably my police escort to the bank or something. Man, word gets around fast!

Gotta go, folks. Thanks for the tips! (no, really, thank you) (better not forgot my steroid spray...this stuff is great!)