The news reports coming from Haiti have been truly heart wrenching. The Haitian people are in need of just about everything but, at the moment, rather than sending canned food and goods, what's most needed is money.

If you're in a position to donate even a small amount of money, you want to make sure that you donate to a well-established, reputable charitable organization because, unfortunately, as there with any disaster, there are unscrupulous people who are perpetrating scams to take advantage of the situation.

I recommend that you make your donations to organizations that have experience with the type of disaster that has occurred in Haiti. If you're not sure about a particular charitable organization, you can check on them on through:

Charity Navigator: ( http://www.charitynavigator.org).

The following charitable organizations are generally considered to be reputable. They are involved with the relief effort in Haiti and they have received 4-star ratings on Charity Navigator:

Doctors Without Borders,-USA: http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org

Action Against Hunger-USA: http://www.actionagainsthunger.org

Americares: http://www.americares.org

CARE: http://www.care.org

Medical Teams Intl: http://www.medicalteams.org

You can also find other reputable charitable organizations on Charity Navigator.

If you have relatives or friends in Haiti and you are seeking information about them, the US State Department Operations Center has set up a toll free number that you can call:
1-888-407-4747.

The difficult work that is being done by doctors, nurses, firefighters, and other volunteers, under impossible circumstances, is to be truly commended. Even though we might not be on the ground in Haiti, we can all do our part. If you'd like to help, but you're not sure what you can do, contact your local church, synagogue, mosque, temple, local government or civic organizations to find out how you can make a difference.

I am a psychotherapist in NYC. To find out more about me, visit my web site: http://www.josephine-ferraro.com/.

To set up a consultation, you can call me at (212) 726-1006.