So with all the CPT code nonsense, I've decided to computerize my practice and do my own billing in a different way.  I bought a computer -- an All-in-One thing with the computer in the screen, and a printer, and a desk to put them on.  I got the password for the WiFi from one of my office mates and am now chipping in for the Verizon bill (well, sort of).  So, yes, if you're wondering, I didn't have a computer, or a desk, in my office until last week.  Before I had a smart phone, I was e-unaccessible while I worked, and I thought the office as my haven, a place where I sit and actually speak to people without the distraction of screens.  If I could serve wine and cheese, my job would be perfect.  Ummm, some days.  So the new computer is fine, it has a really big screen that I can actually see without glasses, but I don't like Windows 8 at all, and you can be sure that Clink and Roy have already thrown up their arms in geeky exasperation because I didn't buy a MacBook.  The insurance form program I've used for years doesn't work with Mac's, but to my geek friends....oy. 

So CPT codes, and mental health issues all over the news, a new computer, new ways of billing, and the inevitable busy-ness of before and after vacation.  Last night, I realized that I had my novels floating out there and I've never checked to see if anyone's saying anything about them.  I Googled Double Billing, and realized it was mentioned in my college alumni magazine (which was also sitting next to my laptop), and that one of my neighbor's books (Concussions and Our Kids) was also in that same "In Brief" review.  But then I stumbled upon a blogger who had written the nicest comments weeks ago. Do check out Tee Bee H's blog "about the non-commercial things we do." I borrowed her graphic above.  Since I was surfing because I couldn't sleep, this was just the nicest thing to read:

The book was a page-turner because of elegant structure and pacing.  The language was often interesting and otherwise non-jarring.  I really cared about the author’s take on things –because she is a psychiatrist? because I’ve followed  her blog for a while?– which meant that I was interested in the protagonist’s thoughts, feelings and actions.  At times I ached for the mess her life was in, at others I wanted to shake her into action, and then she’d find her backbone again, just in the nick.  And there was nothing saccharine about the happy ending – a fine achievement, seriously.