Greetings from Boston!

I am here, with 750 or so psychiatrists, at the Massachusetts General Hospital's 39th annual psychopharmacology conference.   I wanted to update my medication knowledge, and the meeting runs through the weekend.  The day has been stuffed with useful information, and really good lectures -- much too much to blog about and there are still 2 hours left tonight.  Let me just give you a sample from each lecture:

Dr. Nierenberg on Bipolar Depression:
He suggested checking out MoodNetwork.org
"Bipolar depression is really hard to treat; so many people don't get all the way better."
~People can be depressed, manic, anxious and irritable all at the same time.
~Antipsychotics and a  mood stabilizer aren't much better than antipsychotics alone.
~There are 4 FDA approved treatments for bipolar depression: olanzapine/fluoxetine combo, quietipine (Seroquel), Lurasidone (Latuda), and Lamotrigine (Lamictal)
~Seroquel's response rate is the same for 300mg as for 600mg
~Latuda's response rate is the same for 20-60mg as for 80-120mg
~Lamotrigine is not approved for the acute treatment of bipolar depression, but for prevention.  It is well tolerated.
~Lithium + Lamictal are more effective to prevent depression than mania.
~Some people use antidepressants alway, some never : the experts can't agree.
~Low dose Abilify has been disappointing in bipolar depression.
~Single dosing at night may prevent renal complications.

Dr. Perlis on Long-term management of Bipolar Disorder
You only know if someone has bipolar depression after they've had an episode of mania; family history or early age of onset don't make the diagnosis if the patient is depressed.
~Effective antimanic agents: lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, any antipsychotic.
~Lamictal, gabapentin, and toprimate have not been shown to be effective for mania
~Lithium decreases the risk of suicide.
~Aim for a level of at least 0.6, but risk of renal damage increases with time (decades) and levels (>0.8)
~Lithium and valproate are better than valproate alone
~This guy likes lithium.

Dr. Fava on Treatment-resistant depression
Strategies: increase dose, change medications, augment, combine.
~Buspirone is a safe agent to use for augmentation
~Mirapex (pramippexole) --can go gradually up to 1.5mg bid
~There is some way to get a compounding pharmacy to make intranasal ketamine, but this needs to be monitored.
~Lots of stuff has been tried.

More later --  