Happy Thanksgiving!

Now through Black Friday (November 27-29, 2013), three of my novels will be available as free downloads to Kindle. No cost.  No parking.  No crowds. 
 No Kindle, you say?  There is a link below to download a free Kindle app onto your computer, phone, or tablet. 

Double Billing is the story of a woman whose life changes when she discovers she has an identical twin she never knew existed. It's a short book and a quick read with some plot twists.  So far, I think it's my best fiction.

Home Inspection is a story told through psychotherapy sessions in a format that is similar to the HBO series In Treatment. Dr. Julius Strand is a psychiatrist who plods along in his already-lived life until two of his patients inspire him through their own struggles to find love.  

Mitch and Wendy : Lost in Adventure Land is  about two siblings who are struggling with their relationships in the aftermath of their parents' divorce. The story takes place on Wendy's 10th birthday when the kids get lost in an amusement park, only to learn they are being followed by a man who knows all about them from Mitch's misguided Facebook life.  Written for 4-5th graders, or the very young at heart.


If you don't own a Kindle reader, you can install a free Kindle app on your computer, tablet, or cell phone by going here and then you can read any Kindle book, not just mine.

All three novels are also available as as paperbacks from Amazon (but not for free).
 
You can access each book by pressing on the title above, or you can get to all my books in all different formats with a single link to my Amazon page  here.

I'm more than happy to have people download my novels at no cost -- I'll be keeping the doctor day gig -- so please tell/tweet/blog/share the free promotions to anyone you think might be interested.

Finally, if you do read any of the books, please consider putting a review on Amazon.   
 
Thank you so much and enjoy the season.  I'll do this again in December for 2 days.  In the meantime, I may skip the mall this year.  Time to bake pies...