Imagine the scenario where you are an ER physician, nurse, or social worker and a person is brought to the hospital by the police for making a suicidal threat.
"I want to die. My wife left me and our house is in foreclosure."--"Do you have any plans to harm yourself?""My dad shot himself when I was little. That's how I would do it."--"Do you have any firearms at home?""OFFICER! Can you arrest this social worker? He just asked me if I have guns at home."[officer]: "Come with me sir. You have the right to remain silent..."
This is the scenario that could actually happen if Senate Bill 432 passes in Florida. The bill makes it a felony to inquire about firearms access or to include any information about firearms access in the medical record, punishable by up to 5 years in jail and/or a $5 million fine. Excuse my French, but WTF?!

An article in the Psychiatric News by Bob Guldin explains that the bill was introduced in both the House and Senate at the suggestion of the National Rifle Association (NRA) to prevent intrusion into the constitutionally protected right to bear arms.

It has been shown that removal of firearms from the home reduces the risk of a completed suicide. So you'd think such a bill would get laughed out of the legislature? Florida child psychiatrist and APA Assembly recorder said, "This bill is not a stunt... the financial power of the NRA in Florida will make it very difficult for sensible legislators to vote against this bill."

I note that a second version of the bill has been proposed, one that reduces the fine to a minimum of $10,000 for the first offense and a minimum of $100,000 for the third offense. It also reduces the offense from a felony to a "noncriminal violation" and compels the states attorney to pursue a possible violation or face professional misconduct charges. This version does permit certain health care providers to ask the question only in certain specific situations (e.g., an emergency "mental health or psychotic episode") but cannot tell anyone else other than the police. Apparently, a similar bill passed one house in Virginia five years ago before dying.

Next will be a bill that outlaws common sense.

********************

Clink comments: We've talked about issues related to guns before here, in Dinah's post "Guns and the Mentally Ill" and again when I mentioned a poster session that talked about gun ownership laws nationally. At my last American Academy of Psychiatry and Law conference I mentioned that 27 states have statutes with lifetime restrictions on gun ownership for people with mental illness. Other states have time limited restrictions on ownership, and some allow restoration of full rights contingent on a physician's documentation of recovery.

So now we have a dilemma: in states where you need a physician's certificate to buy a gun, how can that same physician then be banned from asking about ownership?? I can imagine the session in which a patient comes in to be "cleared" to buy a weapon.

MD: "Well, you're taking your medicine and your symptoms are all under control. You tell me you're feeling well and you'd like to buy that awesome weapon you've been dreaming about."

Gun buyer: "Yeah! I've done the research and I know exactly what I want."

MD: "I need to know whether you have cognitive skills and emotional stability to handle a responsibility like that. Tell me, have you ever owned a gun before?"

Gun buyer: "Awesome!! Now I can sue you for infliction of emotional distress for violating my Second Amendment rights. Those triple damages will really help me stock up my arsenal."

Bottom line: The NRA can't have it both ways. If they involve psychiatrists in restoration of gun rights, they can't ban them for asking questions about ownership.