[27] . . . [28] . . . [29] . . . [All]
Sorry for the sound quality again this week. We were outside, and I really did put the mic closer to Clink and Dinah than to me. We'll try something a little different next time.


July 9, 2007: #28 Can You Hear Me Now?


Topics include:

Panetti v. Quarterman. Clink talks about a hot-off-the-press, landmark Supreme Court case about competency to be executed and death penalty cases for people with mental illness. She also refers to the Ford v. Wainwright case. "It's a hint that, down the road, we will probably not have a death penalty for mentally ill people, just like we no longer have a death penalty for juveniles or mentally retarded people."

Dinah goes back to Podcast #27 and refers to Dr. Kay Redfield Jamison's book, An Unquiet Mind, talking about therapists' disclosure to patients about their own mental health issues (which was blogged about here).

On Being a Female Intern. Clink rants against DrCrippen's (NHS Blog Doctor) rant about part-time doctors (mostly mothers): DrC: "You need to grow up a little. You can’t expect to pop into the hospital to do occasional clinics at a time of your own choosing in between school runs, parent-teachers association meetings and back packing holidays. Life is not like that. Being a hospital consultant requires commitment, dedication and long hours. There is generous provision for paid maternity leave. What more do you want? ... If you won’t do the hours, you can’t have job... Just because you are a girlie, you can’t expect medical training to be turned on its head."

Physician Stress & Burnout. This discussion transitions into talk of a 2004 article (IC McManus, et al.) on physician stress and burnout, finding that the consequences of physician training stress has more to do with how one handles stress in general.
iPhone Apathy. Roy mentions his iPhone post. Who cares?

iTunes Reviews. Clink asks our listeners to do more reviews of our podcast, and we offer to mention the next 3 reviewers (good or bad) on our next podcast (whoopee!).

Sex Change Operations in Prison?. Clink talks about a recent case of many thousands of dollars being spent litigating a case of a prisoner requesting a sex change operation.

Pristiq. Desvenlafaxine (a metabolite of Effexor or venlafaxine) is up for final approval at the FDA (I misspoke in the podcast... Pristiq is not an extended release of Effexor, but rather a metabolite of it).






Find show notes with links at: http://mythreeshrinks.com/. The address to send us your Q&A's is there, as well.

This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.
Thank you for listening.