Paul is a wreck--he's unshaven, uncombed, and his eyes sink deeper in his head than ever before. Mia is intrusive (so what else is new?) and grills him on how much he must be distressed--she's talked to his lawyer and knows his father died. She repeatedly asks him how he's doing? Is he lonely? And she speculates on aspects of his personal life and tells him it shows in his eyes that he's lonely. Oh, and she's pregnant by an unknown man. She asks Paul to celebrate with her, asks him if sex with his wife was as good after she gave birth, fantasizes about meeting Paul in a bar and running off to Las Vegas with him to get married. She wants to know if he'll be there for her, as she debates the pros and cons of becoming a mother.

Mia is cloying. I want to go home. Paul is good about distancing himself from her intrusions, but she is right that he's not ready to be back at work, and I can't help but wonder if he should continue treating her (or if he ever should have re-started after their first meeting in her legal office). She would be devastated if he refused to treat her, and her devastation would be understandable. But, is he safe with a patient who is asking questions of his lawyer, fantasizing marriage, and repeatedly asking if he'll be there for her in a way that sounds like she wants so much more than a therapist? And is he safe with such a patient, given that he's already professed his love for another patient last season, and admitted to his therapist that he could see himself with a woman like Mia? Not sure where the plot is taking us, but if this were real life, it would be going no where good.
-------------------
April is now getting chemo and she tells Paul she loves his eyes and they are "bottomless." What a life, women falling all over him. Apparently Paul was in the OR when they put in April's port. I don't think they let visitors in the OR in real life. They smile at each other a lot and the session has a flirtatious edge--- is this my imagination>? April falls apart when she hears that Paul doesn't plan to keep taking her to chemo-- one more patient he isn't there enough for-- and she puts it back together when he tells her his father died last week. Enough, it's bedtime.