If you'll look at the photo above, I'm standing towards the upper left, about 8,000 rows back from the Capitol building, 42 people in from the edge, kind of near the Native American Museum. I have one or the Silver invitations to the ceremonies, which put me up front with the chosen quarter million. I'm standing where I can sort of see a jumbotron, except for the tree in front of it and the people in the tree. It's cold. It's crowded. It's really crowded, and I'm thrilled to be a part of the event.

There's not much to say beyond that. Since commenters have asked about my travel plans:
I stayed with a friend in the 'burbs, got dropped at the Metro about 6 AM. I got a seat, but the train quickly filled. I stood in the wrong line for over an hour, but there was no way I could have known that, and no where I could have moved anyway. More lines, cold, and I expected all these things, so it was fine. There was no wind chill factor because all those bodies shielded me from the wind.

The first Metro stop I passed had long lines formed down the street. I tried Union Station and couldn't get near it. I sat for a while on the floor of the lobby to the Postal Museum. The woman next to me was talking on the phone about how she was way in the front, seated and there were marble bathrooms. She saw Usher and Oprah and Denzel. We were at different events, clearly, but both landed on the floor of the museum lobby as inaugural refugees. Oprah and I would hit it off right away, I'm sure of it. All the while, I was getting text messages from the Metro system alerting me to various crowds and shut downs. I texted a friend who works in the District to see if maybe he wanted a visitor. I don't know if he was near me, but what's a few more miles to walk in a crowd on a glorious day? He was inside a building, waiting for the parade, but didn't invite me to join him. I tried the Metro stop in Chinatown, and got through right away. A train pulled up just as I reached the platform. After the first stop, I got a seat, and there were taxis lined up at the station on the other end. I got to my car, drove another hour, and was home by 6.

What an exciting day! I've never seen so many people in my life, anywhere, ever.
Congratulations, President Obama!