[23] . . . [24] . . . [25] . . . [All]
Okay, folks, this one's a bit on the long side, but well worth it. Around the 28-minute mark is an "interview" with talk-show psychologist Dr. Phil. See below for my notes about it, but let's just say that Dinah has vowed to get even with Clink and me. Or, click here to listen to just the prank and the mash-up song.

Also, listen in to us next week in Podcast #32 as Doctor Anonymous joins us as a guest blogger (this one's for real).
AND CHECK OUT ALL OUR OTHER POSTS FROM THIS WEEKEND. Click or scroll....

June 10, 2007: #24 Dr. Phil on Skype

Topics include:

Genetics of Cocaine-Induced Paranoia. Roy talks about a recent article in Biological Psychiatry by Kalayasiri which suggests that a particular mutation (C1021T) in the dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) gene was associated with significantly increased paranoia in a small group of cocaine abusers. Genetics is playing an increasing role in understanding how we respond to drugs AND to our environment.
Dinah wins an award for her writing.
Expectation Vs. Evidence-based Medicine. We get into a detailed discussion about how patients' perceptions and expectations get in the way of evidence-based medicine (with examples from Flea's post on admitting children and direct-to-consumer advertising). "Doc, my friend got better with DrugX so I want to try it." "It goes back to 'who deserves care'."
Dr. Phil visits My Three Shrinks. THIS IS A MUST-LISTEN SEGMENT! Clink and I play a trick on Dinah by "calling" Dr. Phil on Skype and he "interviews" us. This is a riot!! Dinah is such a good sport. [link to DrPhil Soundboard]
Dark Tourism. After reading a NYT piece on touring prisons, Clink discusses the concept of dark tourism, where people seek out notorious sites to see (like cemeteries and prisons). She sent us a humongous scholarly piece on the subject (see Clink's Tr
avelogue for more fun). Dinah talked about visiting catacombs in Paris where the walls are made of human bones, and here's a pic of those. (Note from Dinah, I wanted to put the picture and the link in, but I didn't listen to the podcast to hear if I was editted out. They do those things, you know).



Special DrPhil/MTS mashup treat at the end. Credit KLF (aka The Timelords aka The JAMs) for the song, Doctorin' the Tardis, which you can find on emusic for 25 cents, or on iTunes for 99 cents.








Find show notes with links at: http://mythreeshrinks.com/. The address to send us your Q&A's is there, as well.
This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.

Thank you for listening.