So I'm at work today, seeing patients, and I get a text.  Between patients, I check the phone and there in the body of the text message is a photo of a man I've never seen and he's wearing a duck tie.  The text is from a beloved friend who is a doctor (not a psychiatrist) in another state.  The photo is of the psychiatrist in their medical facility, he's come to work in a duck tie.  As it would happen, it's pure coincidence; he's never heard of Shrink Rap and has no clue that it's our blog motto, but this dear psychiatrist allowed my friend to photograph him and text me his picture, and consented to having his tie on our blog, provided we don't violate HIPAA for any of the ducks.  In case you wondered what your doctor is doing all day, he may be texting photos of ducks to his friends.  

With that as an opener, there have been lots of interesting psychiatry articles on the web.  Let me give you teasers and links:

The Boston Globe has been running a three-part series on their front page about a man with a severe psychotic illness and how it has devastated him and his family.  A reporter followed the family for 18 months, do check it out here.

And while we're talking about the broken mental health system, Dr. Paul Appelbaum has some suggestions for how to fix it in The Guardian.  You can check that out Here.  

And while The Guardian is writing about the broken mental health system in the US, The Economist is writing about the broken mental health system in the UK.  You can read about that Here.  

Scientific American tackles the tough question of whether you should tell your boss you have a mental illness Here.   

Here's a story I liked about a police officer who risked his life to pull a man off a bridge.  We need a good cop story once in while, and they come few and far between in the media these days. 

Here's another police article in The Atlantic about the helpfulness of police Crisis Intervention Teams in San Antonio, and the importance of training the police to understand and help people with psychiatric disorders.  These teams decrease the number of people who end up being killed by police.  

Our Hopkins colleague Dr. Kay Jamison had a op-ed piece in the New York Times on the difficulties of treating depression and how it's important that the psychiatrist be competent, check that out HERE. 

In another moving op-ed piece in the NY Times, Roger Cohen talks about his search to understand his mother's struggle with depression HERE.   

There's been a lot of psychiatry articles in the popular press.  This is just a few, but I do often tweet them when they come out, so do feel free to follow my twitter feed @shrinkrapdinah.


 