[9] . . . [10] . . . [11] . . . [All]

Valentine's Day is soon upon us. Hearts, flowers, and chocolate abound. This got us three shrinks wondering about why chocolate holds such a high position in this whole love-related endeavor.
We talk about the psychopharmacology of chocolate, while we simultaneously try a taste of own pharmacocoatherapy.
Oh, and this is our TENTH PODCAST! (woo)

February 11, 2007:

Topics include:

AJP: False positive drug tests on Effexor XR (venlafaxine) (positive for PCP, or phencyclidine).
Chocolate and Mood [PubMed]: a look at chemicals in chocolate which affect mood, such as theobromine, caffeine, phenylethylamine (PEA), and anandamide.
First study mentioned by Clink, on chemicals in chocolate.
Second study, about mood modulation by food.
Third study, about chocolate and atypical depression.
Green M&Ms. Also, design your own M&Ms, even what is printed on them.
Dogs: Don't eat the chocolate.
Children of Psychiatrists (The Last Psychiatrist). Do psychiatrists have crazier children? (See Dinah's post)
Suicide risk in physicians. A European study (Hawton 2001) found that female doctors, and not male doctors, had increased suicide risk. Furthermore, specialties at highest risk included anesthesiology, generalists, and psychiatrists. A meta-analysis (Schernhammer 2004) found that physicians in general were 1.4 (men) and 2.3 (women) times more likely to commit suicide than the general population.
Questions for us? Email at mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom. We'll answer some starting with Podcast #11.
Next week: Black market price of psych meds; side effects of psychotherapy.

Last week's musical snippet was from 1983 release, Genetic Engineering, from the Dazzle Ships album by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD).


Find show notes with links at:
http://psychiatrist-blog.blogspot.com/2007/02/my-three-shrinks-podcast-10-be-mine.html
This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review). You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com. Thank you for listening.


technorati tags:psychiatry, psychiatrist, psychology, mental, health, medicine, podcast, psychiatric, chocolate, psychopharmacology, theobromine, caffeine, suicide, mood, depression, valentine, valentines
Blogged with Flock