In case you haven't heard, Roy is on vacation. He's blogging us the day-to-day update, complete with photos and mishaps -- starting with the flat tire on Day #1. ClinkShrink is also on vacation. In fact, her vacation was inspired by Roy's photos from his vacation last year. Greetings to all from Baltimore where the remaining co-blogger.... remains.



Okay, so last week I had a 36 hour getaway to the beach where I was hosted by my good friend the Judge-in-Curlers. My three hour drive was punctuated by a text photo that ClinkShrink sent to my phone of her car packed for vacation (bikes on the back), and a lengthy discussion with my shrink friend, Camel. As I arrived at my destination, my cell phone battery died. Dead. Completely dead. Oh, and "bring phone charger" (I have three, plus one for the car that doesn't work) was the last thing on my packing list, and the one thing I forgot. Ugh! I felt anxious inside, borrowed a Blackberry to check my voicemail and call home, and I figured my first trip out in the morning would be to get a 4th charger.



The morning came and it was a lovely beach day. Breakfast, a walk on the boardwalk, and I suddenly realized I felt so much better with a dead phone. And no email access. This is what was meant by Zen. Whatever that means.... I checked my messages periodically with the borrowed Blackberry and reminded myself that no patient had ever called from a bridge ledge only to say they would have jumped had it not been for my brilliant and immediate intervention.



A break from technology-- I think it was a good thing. I often think it makes it hard for us ever to fully relax when the urge is there to glance at the phone, make sure there are no messages, hit the "inbox" button.

Okay, I confess, "I don't have a phone" was my first thought when I was rear-ended on the return trip (no injuries, no dents), but I came home vowing to take it easier on the technology. We'll see.

And just so you know, I've set Roy's new 3g iPhone so that it barks when I call.