Later this month, Shrink Rap will be celebrating it's 10th anniversary!  More later, but we are the longest running psychiatry blog, and we're looking forward to the cake.

As you may know, Shrink Rap is part of a larger group of projects that the three of us, in various combinations, work on.  The list has morphed over the years, and the Accessible Psychiatry Project is now up for a Scattergood Innovation Award.  The nominations closed last week, and public comment is not being requested.  We'd love to have our Shrink Rap readers visit the Scattergood site and leave an encouraging comment.  The Scattergood site is here and comments can be added at the end of The Accessible Psychiatry Project's description: 
http://www.scattergoodfoundation.org/innovideas/accessible-psychiatry-project#.VwGidHB4EWg
If you do add a comment, please accept our thanks.  

For a recap of our projects over time:


The Accessible Psychiatry Project







The Accessible Psychiatry Project
Encouraging dialogue about psychiatry across media.
--Steven R. Daviss, M.D.­­
--Annette Hanson, M.D.
--Dinah Miller, M.D.

Mission Statement:
The Accessible Psychiatry Project strives to encourage dialogue about psychiatric disorders and their treatment in order to explore issues of controversy and misunderstanding in our field. Through open dialogue, in both new media and print, we hope to foster discussion about the work psychiatrists do, and to decrease stigma associated with the treatment of mental disorders.

Components of The Accessible Psychiatry Project include:

Shrink Rap: The longest running psychiatry blog 

on the Internet, since April, 2006


Shrink Rap News: A blog and print column for 

Clinical Psychiatry News


Shrink Rap Today: A collateral blog on the 

Psychology Today Website. 


My Three Shrinks podcast;
 
November, 2006- 2012,  70 episodes aired

Featured on the iTunes Medical Podcasts Webpage


ShrinkRapRoy tweets about psychiatry and health care.
HITshrink tweets about health information technology and health care reform (HITshrink's blog is here).

ClinkShrink tweets about issues pertaining to psychiatry & the law; sometimes about birds

ShrinkRapDinah tweets mostly on mental health issues.

Access to Care: MarylandPsychiatrists.Net  is a website designed to facilitate quick entry to outpatient care.

Find us on Facebook at ShrinkRapBook : http://www.facebook.com/shrinkrapbook.


Books:
Committed: The Battle Over Involuntary Psychiatric Care, by Dinah Miller and Annette Hanson, In Press, Johns Hopkins University Press for Fall, 2016.

Shrink Rap: Three Psychiatrists Explain Their Work, by Dinah Miller, Annette Hanson, and Steven Roy Daviss,  Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2011. 



The Shrink Rappers give talks on: 
~ The Public Face of Psychiatry Across Media
~Access to Care
~Psychiatry and Technology (Dr. Daviss)
~Forensic Psychiatry (Dr. Hanson)
~soon: Involuntary/Forced Psychiatric Care
~soon: Mental Illness, Violence, and Violence Prevention