Oh my, time has been getting away from me  and it's been a bit since I've written a blog post on Shrink Rap!  

First let me steer you over to Clinical Psychiatry News where ClinkShrink has written an article called "New Mexico High Court States that Assisted Suicide is not a Right."  If you surf over, you'll also note that Clink has a lovely new head shot up next to her article.

As I've mentioned before, the Boston Globe's famed spotlight team is doing a series on the trouble public mental health system in Massachusetts.  The second installation went up on July 7th and discusses the roll of the police, and police training, in handling psychiatric emergencies.  It read just a little like the chapter from our forthcoming book, Committed, only I liked our chapter on the police and Crisis Intervention Training much better (perhaps I'm biased?).  In writing our chapter, I was privileged to have the help of Montgomery County PD officer Scott Davis and he is a treasure.  Also, our chapter had more meat to it,  so you can check out the Globe's piece and when Committed is available, let me know which you like better.

Otherwise, I have to say that the news is leaving me rather despondent.  I tend to be an optimist, to have at least a little trust in the system and in the goodness of people, and it's all being tested.  341 million people in this country and we can't find two smart, honest, kind, capable and energetic people to run for president.  The stories of police officers shooting people leave me ill, and the mass murders in Orlando (which now seems to be old and forgotten news) and Dallas, are just horrific.  Baltimore has always been a dangerous city, and the Freddie Gray trials are wearing on us all.  There are protests, sink holes, random murders of children.  In the last two days, a former Hopkins professor was murdered while walking her dogs (the assailant remains at large) and a 21 year old young man in the suburbs was shot and killed while walking his girlfriend home.  Between the election and the crime, I may be due for a social media vacation.  I'm sad.  Can't we make America Kind Again?