Okay, first I was scrolling through KevinMD's blog, and this caught my attention:
In Whoa! an Er Doc talks about psychiatric, pain, and obese patients in his ER. Regarding the obese patient in the ER, he writes:

However, many, many people are obese because they simply eat too much unhealthy food and do not exercise enough. Many of these people live in subcultures within America where obesity is not only tolerated (mostly in women), but is praised, despite the well known health hazards. Obese patients are treated with respect in my ER - however, if they are disrespectful to the staff, demanding, and make a nuisance in my shop, they will get rebuked,just like any one else. Additionally, just like with smoking, I feel it is a doctor’s duty to reprimand patients for unhealthy behaviour - and this includes unhealthy eating and subsequent obesity.

I'll refrain from rambling about people who blame overweight folks for their condition. Another post, another day. What grabbed my attention was this doctor's use of the word Reprimand. It's not just that he reprimands, oh my gosh, no, he feels a duty to reprimand. I think I missed that part of medical school.

Perhaps it's just the harsh terminology. He's talking about behaviors here: over-eating, under-exercising, smoking. Can I add drinking alcohol and using illicit drugs to the list? I do, however, sometimes feel a need to remind people that smoking is bad for your health (it seems to be one of the few behavioral issues we're fairly certain of) and it may well be that using illicit drugs makes it harder to stabilize one's mood. So far, very few people have changed their behavior simply because I've suggested it would be healthier. And fortunately, so far, very few people have left treatment when I've repeatedly suggested they change their behavior. Sometimes I add that if they don't do so, I may be limited in my ability to help them.

I do feel kind of obligated to state the obvious from time to time. I don't think I scold, and sometimes I wonder if I was firmer, more insistent, or more threatening, might I be more successful in getting people to change their behavior? The fact is, I don't have that in me, I don't really believe it would make a difference in anyone's motivation to give up their addictions, and I believe a physician's role is to treat illness and be compassionate, not to reprimand.

ClinkShrink, of course, just puts them in Lock Down.