 From my email, I'm passing this along.  This organization has no ties to Shrink Rap:
 Beyond Crazy
Deadline: February 9, 2015
Every year, one in four American adults will endure the trials of a diagnosable mental health disorder. But although many Americans have experienced a mental illness, either firsthand or through a family member, friend, or colleague, the stigma surrounding mental illness remains. We believe that the most important tool we have for defusing the power of this stigma is sharing true stories and revealing the real people beneath labels.
In Fact Books seeks original stories for an upcoming anthology tentatively titled BEYOND CRAZY: TRUE STORIES OF SURVIVING MENTAL ILLNESS. Stories should combine a strong and compelling narrative with an informative or reflective element, reaching beyond a strictly personal experience for some universal or deeper meaning.
We’re looking for well-written prose, rich with detail and a distinctive voice; writing should be evocative, vivid, and dramatic. All essays must tell true stories and be factually accurate. Everything we publish goes through a rigorous fact-checking process; editors may ask for sources and citations. Authors of accepted essays will be awarded a modest honorarium upon publication.
Guidelines: Essays must be previously unpublished and no longer than 4,500 words. Multiple entries are welcome, as are entries from outside the United States.
You may submit essays online or by regular mail:
By regular mail  Postmark deadline February 9, 2015
Please send your manuscript; a cover letter with complete contact information, including the title of the essay and word count; and an SASE or email for response to:
    In Fact Books
    c/o Creative Nonfiction Foundation
    Attn: Beyond Crazy
    5501 Walnut Street, Suite 202
    Pittsburgh, PA 15232

Online Deadline to upload files: 11:59 pm EST February 9, 2015
To submit online, click here. (Note: There is a $3 convenience fee to submit online.)
Creative Nonfiction | In Fact Books
5501 Walnut St | Ste 202 | Pittsburgh | PA | 15232
T 412.688.0304 | F 412.688.0262
www.creativenonfiction.org