There's In Treatment, which I'm actually enjoying a bit more lately, but aside from that, things are kind of quiet with Shrink Rappers. Roy had the flu, and he's taken on a zillion projects (How many Committees can one man be on? I don't know, but I'll call you when Roy finishes changing all the light bulbs), and he's falling behind with my To Do List. He'll get there, he always does, and just to keep you tuned in, we had a great pod casting session this past weekend where we were joined by Dr. Raymond DePaulo, the Chairman of Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins and one of the country's best known experts on Mood Disorders. So, sometime in the next few weeks, look for two episodes of My Three Shrinks where Ray joins Roy and we all ramble about treatment-resistant depression and The New York Times, and oh, we talked and talked.

ClinkShrink has been busy in jail, got a bunch of job stuff going on, and her own committee stuff. I don't know why she's not blogging, but she's not.

Me: Well, I'm trying to catch up on Lost, stay up on In Treatment, Spring sports are starting for my kids, one of them has decided that I'm learning to play squash now, and as of 4 P.M. today, I'm happy to announce that I'm on VaCATIon!!! Plans are still being formed, but one thing I'll be doing is visiting a high school friend whom I haven't seen for years. ArniBeth (a high school nickname) and I e-mail several times a day, every day, and we've only seen each other once in the last ten years, so a short flight and I'll also get to meet her daughter, who is kind enough to be the same age as one of my little charmers.

Okay, so there's this one other little project we're trying to work on: getting some Shrink Rap and My Three Shrinks stuff together in a cohesive way to turn it into a book. We've mentioned it before, and on one of the podcasts Roy will ask for your input. We're getting there, at least in terms of a proposal, and yes, Anon, we know you think we should keep our day jobs. I keep nagging Roy and telling him the book will make him rich. I don't think he cares about fame, but who knows....now that we've got Eric our friend at CBS...and Dr. Phil...who knows?

It's lighter later and that's good, at least here in Maryland. Springtime mania hasn't yet begun. Winter depression is dissipating. I hope you are all well, and by all means comment on my non-post.