Over on the Neurotransmitting blog, Dr. Joseph Andrews, a 4th year psychiatry resident, writes about Where Psychiatry Sits With Medical Students and What We Can Do About it. 
He writes, in a good deal of detail, about the finances of it all and about why someone who has taken on a lot of debt to go to medical school might not be able to afford to become a psychiatrist.  This isn't new -- I went to medical school knowing I wanted to be a psychiatrist, and there were medical schools I simply didn't apply to because I knew I would need to take on so much debt that my monthly payments would be more than I could afford on a resident's salary.  Ah, those schools were kind enough to provide that information in blunt terms, I remember pamphlets that said that if you needed to take out a HEAL loan at the high interest of the day, then you could expect to pay back $1700/month.  That assumed no college debt (which I already had) and at the time, residents made roughy $26,000/year.  Those applications went into the trash.

Dr. Andrews also talks about the stigma of psychiatry -- his friend's family would be shamed if she went into psychiatry, and he talks about how there are other mental health professions for those interested in the field.  It's a good post.  And I'm here anyway, though in college I did plan to be a psychologist.  I'm not sure what happened along the way, but suddenly psychiatry sounded better.

So I'm here to say it's still pretty good.  I still like being a shrink, and people get better much more than they ever told me in medical school.  I still talk to my patients and get to know them.  At the end of most days, I feel appreciated.  There is still a lot of variety to what psychiatrists can do -- research, teaching, brief contact practices (many many patients for brief med checks), or high contact practices (psychoanalysis, or less high contact with psychotherapy), administration, and blogging (warning: no pay).  I don't ever wake up and wish I was  a dermatologist.

So do check out Neurotransmitting -- it's one of very few blogs by a psychiatry resident and Dr. Andrews is just getting started. 