Obesity is one of the leading health problems in the US today. Emotional eating as well as lack of exercise and poor eating habits often leads to obesity. More and more, we're hearing in the news and reading in the newspapers that obesity can lead to serious health problems, including diabetes, high blood pressure, heart attacks, strokes and other health problems. Obesity can also drag down our self confidence.

What is a Habit?
So, if most of us know that unhealthy eating habits can lead to health problems, why is it so hard for us to change our eating habits?

To understand this, we need to look at how habits are formed. When you engage in certain tasks or actions on a routine basis, your brain sets up neural pathways that make it more efficient for you to perform these tasks. For instance, when you brush your teeth each day, you don't need to think about how to do it each time.

Your brain has already set up an efficient pathway so that you can do it automatically without much thought. The more you perform the task, the more ingrained it becomes in your brain. This is one of the reasons why it's so hard to give up negative habits like smoking and overeating. Your brain has already established a particular pattern in response to whatever triggers your emotional eating.

Whether you overeat because you're sad, lonely, angry, frustrated--the reason doesn't matter. Think of it this way: If there's a muddy dirt path that people walk over each day, after a while, that path gets deeper and deeper with use. It's the same for your brain--the neural pathways become deeper. Very often, we're not aware of that we're engaging in emotional overeating because these habits are automatic and unconscious.

How to Break the Emotional Eating Habit:
Clinical hypnosis (also known as hypnotherapy) can access the unconscious mind where the problems that cause emotional overeating lie. Hypnotherapy can get to the root of the problem, break the pattern of overeating, and substitute healthier coping mechanisms.

What to Do
If you think you have a problem with emotional overeating and you want to lose weight, you could benefit from clinical hypnosis from a qualified hypnotherapist.

I am a licensed psychotherapist and hypnotherapist in New York City. To find out more about me, please visit my website:  Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist

Feel free to call me at (212) 726-1006 for a consultation.