Happy Thanksgiving!

I realized that it's been a long time since I had a free promotion for my novels, and with Black Friday looming, I thought it would be nice to have Shrink Rap jump on the bandwagon with Black Friday shopping you can do from your living room, and with a great price, too: free novels.  The promotion goes for 4 days: Now through Monday 11/30/15.  If it goes well, I will set up another promotion for one day in December.

Double Billing is the story of a woman whose life changes when she discovers she has an identical twin she never knew existed. It's a quick read with a little  psychiatry sprinkled in.
 The book was a page-turner because of elegant structure and pacing.  I really cared about the author’s take on things –because she is a psychiatrist? because I’ve followed  her blog for a while?– which meant that I was interested in the protagonist’s thoughts, feelings and actions.  At times I ached for the mess her life was in, at others I wanted to shake her into action, and then she’d find her backbone again, just in the nick.  


Home Inspection is a story told through psychotherapy sessions in a format that is similar to the HBO series In Treatment. Dr. Julius Strand is a psychiatrist who plods along in his already-lived life until two of his patients inspire him through their own struggles to find love.  
  I like to read all sorts of books, but books where there's something in it that reflects a part of me, a part of my life, a part of my experiences, are something I go out of my way to find. I have not found any fiction book that does nearly as much to show what psychotherapy is like.


If you don't own a Kindle reader, you can install a free Kindle app on your computer, tablet, or cell phone by going here and then you can read any Kindle book. You don't need to buy a Kindle to read on your computer, tablet, or smartphone.

There is is a single link to my Amazon page with all my books here.
The price for Double Billing, Home Inspection, and a children's novel: Mitch and Wendy, are all $0 and can be downloaded instantly.

 Both are also available as as paperbacks from Amazon, but not for free.


I'm more than happy to have people download my novels at no cost -- I'll be keeping the doctor day gig -- so please tell/tweet/blog/share the free promotions to anyone you think might be interested.

Finally, If you do read any of the books, please consider putting a review on Amazon.   
 


The promotion starts Friday, so it's off to turkey and family for today.  Wishing you all a gentle holiday.