Roy has Electronic Medical Records on his mind lately and if you'd like to hear him, oh, he'd love to tell you his thoughts. Or read his last post here. I'm still not sure how I feel about Electronic Records-- I worry about confidentiality and the propagation of incorrect information.

So why are medical records oh so important? What about making other important things into Electronic Records so that information can be shared and referred to? Never mind Electronic Medical Records, what I need are Electronic Hair Records!

Hair, you ask? Hair! Let me tell you about my hair. I am a user of hair chemicals and it's no picnic when I'm away and need an emergency procedure. What could electronic hair records do?
Well there was the two year period where I saw a very nice hair dresser and somehow my hair was always too light. I had her switch chemical brands, but to no avail. Finally, I switched salons, and my hair is darker. There was the time that I wanted to have a chemical procedure done with a gift certificate at another salon and was told that if I'd had a certain process done previously, my hair might break off or fall out. If there was an EHairR, my hair dresser could have checked this-- instead we had to call my home salon and determined that it wasn't safe....my hair, indeed, could have fallen out. Oh, and because of all the processes, I must use a sulphate-free shampoo. No EHairR: I have to be the one to remind the shampoo person of this issue each and every time. No one even asks.

So what could an Electronic Hair Record do?

Keep track of all chemical processes, brand names, colors, and dates of application.
Coordinate dates of chemical processes to prevent interactions.
Include panoramic photos of all haircuts so that patron could walk in and say, I liked the way it looked after the last cut and that cut could be reviewed.
Include standardization of lengths: bangs to a half inch above the eyebrows would be precise.
For those with thinning hair or balding, track hair loss.
Include computer generated growth photos to help schedule haircuts with important life events.
Download onto a iPhone app so the patron could, at last, own their own EHairR!
Compare costs and ratings for different salons and hairdressers.
I think I'm on to something here.