It's Sunday morning (2pm is still "morning," right?) here in Shrink Rap land. I've had coffee with the judge, I've done a load of laundry, I've run a 10 minute mile and then walked another one, and, of course, I've read part of the Sunday New York Times.

It's been an exciting morning with the paper. I've discovered that I'm either middle-aged or on the cusp of it. This is okay, not really news and now that I have teenage kids, I think I'm entitled to it.

So, first I read a review of a book by Gina Kolata called Rethinking Thin. The book reportedly downplays the dangers of obesity (let's not go there) and trails four patients as they go through a clinical trial at a University of Pennsylvania obesity treatment group. Back in the day when middle-age wasn't even on my radar, I worked as a research assistant in that group--some of those folks are even still there (I think that makes them Old). I hear the book isn't all flattering to the group, but I may have to buy it anyway.

So now that it may be okay for me to be fat, I moved on to the issue of Wisdom, a rather vaguely defined condition and it was sort of amazing that so long an article could say so little. I thought of Roy when I read, "One of the most interesting areas of neuroscience research involves looking at the way people regulate their emotions and how that regulation can change over the course of a lifetime." Roy, why aren't you here? Yes, yes, yes: there were fMRI studies quoted, not to mention salivary cortisol levels. No oxytocin, I'm so sorry. Okay, so I read and read, all the time wondering if I am Wise. I got to the end of the article and there it was, a link to an on-line test I could take. I was on it-- the test scored as 1-5 and answering quickly, I scored a 3.7. I have relatively moderate wisdom. Probably one different answer and I could have gotten a 4 and had moderately high wisdom. Okay, I'm off to test my husband (who is definately wise), maybe the kids, maybe Max, and I still have to read the article on the guy who stopped his anti-depressants. I may be back.