[21] . . . [22] . . . [23] . . . [All]

Note: Chapter 6 is up on Double Billing:
Click Here

* * *
Aarghh!! This is the second version of these show notes. Blooger helpfully auto-saved the first one into oblivion (how do you turn this "feature" off?).

Anyway, Welcome back! Dinah's friend, Victor, joins us again this week, providing his insights into salutations and valedictions. And, for our US listeners, don't forget to celebrate National Duckling Month this weekend (oh, and Memorial Day, too).

May 27, 2007: #22 Forced Treatment

Topics include:
Physician-Assisted Executions. The American Medical News had a story by Kevin B. O'Reilly about how some states are trying to force physicians to participate in executions. The ethics of such activities are debated.

Realizing the Promise of Pharmacogenomics. A draft federal report is available for public comment (by June 1) about the development of pharmacogenetics and the impact of genomic medicine on the future of health care. You can find the report and comment form here. "The report identifies a number of challenges for the development of pharmacogenomics and its effective integration into health care practice, including the need to improve the health-information infrastructure, to provide education and training for practitioners, and to maintain the confidence of all stakeholders by effectively addressing ethical, legal and social issues arising from pharmacogenomics."

Dopamine, Genetics, and Environmental Stressors in ADHD. As an example of the above, this month's Archives of General Psychiatry has an article by Manfred Laucht, et al., showing evidence of an interaction between a mutation in the Dopamine Transporter (DAT) gene and severe environmental stress (e.g., abuse) triggering symptoms of ADHD. Also mentioned in the podcast is data suggesting that certain Serotonin Transporter Promoter (5HTTP) mutations predict one's response to SSRI antidepressants, the development of side effects to these drugs, and the propensity to develop psychiatric symptoms.

Forced Outpatient Treatment in PA. Liz Spikol, who writes the blog and newspaper column, Trouble with Spikol, for the Philadelphia Weekly, writes about Pennsylvania Senate Bill 226, which would make it easier to make people with severe mental illness who are "unlikely to survive safely in the community without supervision." A long debate on the podcast ensues (half the 'cast) about the ethics and practicality of such tactics.

Don't miss Roy's telling of the official (according to psychologist, Richard Wiseman) funniest joke in the world (around the 25 minute mark). Just to be on the safe side, be sure you aren't driving when you listen to it.



Find show notes with links at: http://mythreeshrinks.com/. The address to send us your Q&A's is there, as well.
This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.

Thank you for listening.