Today is Martin Luther King Day of Service. Today is the a day when we commemorate Martin Luther King's life and legacy through volunteering our service in our communities. Martin Luther King, Jr. taught us that, through nonviolence and providing service to others, we can make a difference in advancing racial equality and social justice.
Honoring Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day of Service
We honor Martin Luther King's memory by coming together with other volunteers to help with a variety of projects in our communities, including: collecting food and clothing, delivering meals, helping to clean up parks and other community areas, reading to children, helping the elderly, and many other projects.

This special day of service helps to remind us that we need not wait for a special day to volunteer our services. There are countless ways that we can provide service to others every day. Our service need not involve grand gestures. Even small gestures that are sincere, without expectation of recognition, can go a long way to helping others. You can contact your local community organizations to find out how you can help.

Martin Luther King, Jr.
Mahatma Gandhi
Mahatma Gandhi's ideas of nonviolence and selfless service were influential in Martin Luther King Jr.'s development and his success as a peace maker and civil rights leader. The tradition of nonviolence, ahimsa, is an important part of Indian culture and India's religions, including Hinduism and Buddhism. To find out more about Mahatma Gandhi, visit: http://www.gandhiserve.org.

Mahatma Gandhi
If you would like to find out more about what you can do, visit the Martin Luther King Day of Service web site where you can obtain more information about Martin Luther King's life and legacy and the Martin Luther King Day of Service: http://www.mlkday.gov.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist. 

I work with individual adults and couples.

To find out more about me, visit my web site: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006.


photo credit: Tony Fischer Photography via photopin cc

photo credit: YardSale via photopin cc

photo credit: Ben Sutherland via photopin cc