Lately, it seems like all the press about psychiatry in The New York Times is bad. We don't talk to our patients, we over-medicate them all from the children to the elderly, we all get bribes from drug companies. It's not that I don't think that these things don't happen, it's just that I don't like the sensational tones, and the one-sided nature of the presentation of psychiatrists as bad, the generalizations that it's "everyone," and the use of information taken out of context to make our practitioners look bad.

In a May 9th article Gardiner Harris writes:

More than half of the antipsychotics paid for by the federal Medicare program in the first half of 2007 were “erroneous,” the audit found, costing the program $116 million for those six months.
“Government, taxpayers, nursing home residents as well as their families and caregivers should be outraged and seek solutions,” Daniel R. Levinson, inspector general of the Department of Health and Human Services, wrote in announcing the audit results.
Mr. Levinson apparently feels the government should collect information on diagnoses so correct prescribing can be assessed.

On CNN today, Danny Carlat writes his own response in "In Defense of Antipsychotic Drugs for Dementia."

The story highlights include:
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
Daniel Carlat: Report implies evil doctors are giving deadly drugs to nursing home patients
But antipsychotics are most effective drug for calming agitation in dementia, he writes
Carlat: No drugs are FDA-approved for this agitation, a terrible condition
Carlat writes:

But in this particular case, the Office of the Inspector General has it wrong, and Levinson's statements on behalf of Health and Human Services reflect an astonishingly poor understanding of the workings of medical care in general and psychiatric care in particular.
The unfortunate fact is that no medications are FDA-approved for the agitation of dementia, and yet the condition is common.
Although it's true that a prescription for antipsychotics to treat agitation in dementia is "off-label," this hardly means they are ineffective or that Medicare claims for these drugs are "erroneous." In fact, large placebo-controlled trials have shown that antipsychotics are the most effective medications for the agitation that often bedevils patients with dementia.
When these drugs are successful, they soothe the inner turmoil that makes life intolerable for these patients, improving their quality of life dramatically.