When we started blogging, we looked for the blogs of other psychiatrists, and even other non-shrink docs, and linked to them. It's been a while (oh, nearly 3 years) and mental health blogs have come and gone. I thought I'd survey the scene again. So just a list:
Dr. X's Free Associations : psychology with a conservative (?) bent.
May Shrink or Fade: a young(?) inpatient psychiatrist in New England ponders the world.
Turn Your Head and Scoff: by our correctional friend in San Diego, FooFoo5
The Last Psychiatrist: Assorted psychiatric and other rantings
Garth Kroeker is a blogging psychiatrist
The Psychiatrist Blog is written by Dr. Michelle Tempest.
Mind Hacks: Neuroscience and Psychology
Psyched Out: Musings of a psychiatric social worker
In Practice: Peter Kramer's psychiatry blog in Psychology Today.
Oh, Psychology Today actually has a whole list of mental health blogs: try here.
PsychCentral is ...oh, psych central.
Carlat's Psychiatry Blog: focuses on medications and medical research
Clinical Psychology and Psychiatry: A Closer Look
CorePsychBlog: psychiatry with a radio show.
Psychiatric Drug Facts with Dr. Peter Breggin features a psychiatrist who doesn't like meds
The Treatment Advocacy Center -- kind of describes itself.
Mental Nurse: a multi-author mental health blog in the UK
Intueri: to contemplate -- by a psychiatrist.
Ars Psychiatrica: by another psychiatrist! mixes with art and literature Couch Trip: by a psychologist (or soon-to-be?)
Everyone Needs Therapy by a PhD in social work (--Really?)
Jung at Heart by a Jungian psychotherapist
Somatosphere: a multi-author, multi-specialty blog, includes psychiatry
And from Irving, Texas: A psychiatrist who learned from veterans.
I've somehow lost Shiny Happy Person and her Trick Cycling for beginners blog.
The Snarky Gerbil is a psychotherapist-in-training.
Our blog friend psychiatrist TigerMom writes with two other docs on Two Women Blogging (these people can't count).
Juliaink is a psychiatrist who posts on Mothers In Medicine.
Modern Psychoanalysis is a blog by Jim about....psychoanalysis.
Shrinkwrapped (!!!) is a psychiatrist/psychoanalyst in New Jersey. Ah, he needs a better blog name. Might I suggest....
Dr. Deb talks about her work as a psychologist.
Katie Malinski is a social worker who is a parenting coach.
CoffeeYogurt is a blog by a psychologist who visits us.
Dr. Doug Bremmer writes: Before You Take That Pill.
Dr. Shock, M.D., PhD, has a 'neurostimulating blog' with a chocolate post!


Oh, there are more. I tried to confine it to blogs by mental health professionals...but there are so many great medical blogs, and blogs by patients, and many of our readers have neat things going on. More another day. If I missed a psychiatry blog, then by all means....