Greetings from The Big Apple! Kids are still asleep, husband's getting ready to head to TKTS so we can see a show tonight.

Before I start talking about In Treatment, I have some links.

The New York Times has an article on So You Want to Be a Star Blogger. We're doing okay here at Shrink Rap, I think. We've passed the $100 mark on Google Ads (can we go to KoKo's for crabcakes, now???) and we get a couple thousand visitors per week. I'm happy. Oh, I'm on vacation, that always makes me happy.

Gerbil is having a baby soon, and still she took the time to send us This Link about In Treatment. Apparently 38 people are still watching it. I'm one of them. Best wishes for a happy, healthy baby Gerbil.
--------

So for the other 37 people still watching, the show has gotten better. I've only watched through Tuesday, and with vacation, I may be behind for a bit. It ends next week, so I imagine I'll catch up. I'm also working on John Adams, but no blogging on it, and I'm an episode behind on LOST.

At the end of their Couples' session on Friday, Paul's phone rang-- it was clearly something awful and I was worried that Sophie had committed suicide. My husband thought it was Alex. He was right. Oh, he's always right. Monday we meet at Alex's funeral. Paul talks with Alex's son Roy and offers the boy some kind words and support. He then finds Laura there (wait, who goes to a funeral of someone they've had a brief fling with??) Paul knew she'd be there, he'd called her, and he talks about his own childhood losses. Alex's father mistakes Laura for Paul's wife.

Tuesday, Alex's father shows up in Paul's office. He wants to know what drove his son, is fearful of losing connection with Alex. He's just like Alex--- challenging one moment, pleasant the next. He compares psychotherapy to prostitution then later apologizes. He implies that the psychotherapy dredged thinks up and left Alex vulnerable, so vulnerable that he died while on a training mission. A question was raised as to whether the death was a suicide. The session is intense, painful at moments, well acted. Personally, I think Alex's narcissism would have protected him from suicide, I'm voting that it was an accident. I know: it's just a show.

My best to all. Clink, Max misses you.