Wandering Visitor, a very positive-thinking resident who is running Grand Rounds next week, is looking for posts on what inspires us (see also Why Do I Blog?). So we thought we'd have a go at this. We are three psychiatrists from three different perspectives (prison-based forensic psychiatry, outpatient psychiatry both private and clinic-based, and hospital-based consultation-liaison psychiatry) who blog and podcast about stuff that captures our interest.

Clinkshrink:
At the risk of sounding oppositional (who, me?), I'm inspired by my co-bloggers particularly when I disagree with them. Fortunately they remain my friends in spite of this. Friendly disagreement is a wonderful source of intellectual growth and mental stimulation.

I'm also inspired by any topic that gives me a chance to talk about what it's like to work in a correctional facility, care for inmates or generally care for those who aren't able to care for themselves. I think it's important to remind people that you can't "lock someone up and throw away the key" and forget they exist. I'm here to talk about what happens within the walls.

I like the unusual and the off-beat; I blog about cannibals and insanity acquittees and human sacrifice and write travelogues about my favorite historical prisons. Occasionally I try to be relevant to my forensic training by reviewing topics like the Tarasoff duty and sex offender commitment laws.

Occasionally I ramble about ducks and that really floats my boat. My co-bloggers are very patient with me.

Roy:
This "what inspires me" bit puts me at risk of getting sappy and melodramatic. To minimize this risk, I will switch into Outline mode...
sunsets
injustice
Mother Nature
space
ants
Boolean logic
Stephen Hawking
"Uncertain Smile" (The The)
"Bario Alto" (Thievery Corporation)
the smell in the air after it rains
Leo Laporte
Monty Python
Alright, that's enough of that.

Dinah:
Sadly, the first thing that came to my mind when I thought about What Inspires Me is: Good Food. Why? How? I don't know, it just does. I'm hoping that I don't miss out on too many Hot Fudge Sundaes in the name of healthy living and the never-ending quest to be a size smaller.

Goals of any type inspire me. I'm slow and steady with good endurance, but I've never had any speed. ClinkShrink runs 9 minute miles, Roy's wife does half-marathons. I decided I should be able to run: just one 10 minute mile. Then 2 miles in 20 minutes. I've hated every second of it and I'm convinced that the longer, slower, uphill trek was better for me, but hey, I did it. Why? Why not. So trying to get my latest novel published is a goal, and by all means, drop by Double Billing and comment on my fiction. I had to get that plug in.

My husband, my children, my dog Max, and the wonderful friends I have in my life all inspire me often. ClinkShrink, Roy, and Camel are among the most inspiring. My patients are often inspiring and I wish I could write blog posts about some of the brave and amazing people I see.