[17] . . . [18] . . . [19] . . . [All]

Grand Rounds at Shrink Rap: BYOB
(Bring Your Own Brain)
...also, My Three Shrinks Podcast 18...







[Well, this was a lot of fun to put together. We'll have to do it again sometime... in a couple of years (Actually, the iPhone 3G Edition in June 2008)! You can thank Clink for the fancy html work on the brain -- click a brain region or title to go to that section -- Roy for the linking and formatting and producing the podcast (or click here to open a new window with the .mp3 running so you can listen to us blather on about all these excellent posts), and Dinah for... umm... oh, yeah, she wrote a lot of the copy. Watching the three of us try to figure out how to organize all 50 posts into 8 categories was like watching the Three Stooges trying to hang wallpaper. So, charge up your laptop, get yourself a drink, and make yourself comfortable. Then start enjoying these great articles. But, remember, enjoy them responsibly.]

--|May 8 Grand Rounds is at TBTAM (The Blog That Ate Manhattan),
--|where it is "dedicated to our favorite surgery registrar, Barbados Butterfly,
--|whose blog was unceremoniously taken down not too long ago. "


Be sure to check out Interested Participant, whose link we initially butchered. IP blogs about the serious civil liberty consequences of a bill in Congress to expand the registry of mental health adjudicants in National Database of the Mentally Ill. "After all, that's how Hitler was able to get his Aryan purity project launched." This is a nice summary of current meaning of the term "adjudication" and how redefinition could open the records of many patients.


Also, check out ER Nursey's post about a Bad Week for the Thirty Year-Olds.

And be sure to check out the Medscape interview between us and Dr. Nicholas Genes, the doc who started Grand Rounds!


DUCKS
The Shrink Rap Silly Award For Most Duck References goes to Universal Health for posting Duck Soup. Nice job! Such thorough research, but not for quacks!
Speaking of quacks, Liverpool Leftovers gives us a fun post about Quacktitioners and the Quackometers.
Top


CASES: ABOVE THE NECK
Val Jones from Dr Val and the Voice of Reason wonders about aging and what makes one particular demented patient rotten in The Great Unveiling.

Adam of NY Emergency Medicine blogs about the challenges of recognizing and managing psychological illness in the emergency department when it presents as physical symptoms. In A Broken Soul, the story had a happy ending.

In Tales of an Emergency Room Nurse, a case of psuedoseizures is discussed in Emotion as a Cause of Illness.

In a Bad Week for the Thirty Year-Olds, ER Nursey describes three sad cases she saw in the ER.

In One Post Can Be All It Takes, Anxiety, Addiction and Depression Treatments looks at new research that points out the effects that one dose of opiate can have on the brain. Using morphine, researchers showed that even a single dose can have a powerful effect in mice, which indicates opiates might have similar repercussions in human brains. [not really a case, but close enough. -R]
Top


CASES: BELOW THE NECK
Dr. Marc Greenstein shows us pictures of bladders and pelvi. We never knew they did prostatectomies on robots.

Healthline's Ken Trofatter writes a poignant post about the delivery of a healthy baby to a couple who'd previously given birth to a stillborn child in Second Verse Different from the First!

In Clinical Cases, the question is asked, "Can I Stand on My Head While on Coumadin?."

In The Will to Survive, Dr. George from Odysseys of George tells an uplifting story of a young woman who made a miraculous recovery from a horrific accident.

In Pride Goeth Before The Fall, Movin' Meat tells us about an obvious case of appendicitis that wasn't.

Wandering Visitor shows us pictures of people with extra body parts in Extra...Special.

TBTAM in The Blog That Ate Manhattan describes a patient who is concerned about her risks of developing breast cancer now that her sister has been diagnosed, in When Cancer Strikes Close to Home.
Top


DEALING WITH ILLNESS
Islamic poet Tiel Aisha Ansari of Knocking From Inside writes about the challenge of recovery in Physical Therapy. Whether recovering from mental or physical disability: "I can't cheat just work, and pray, and be it as God wills."

AMiB shares this video, "In My Mind". "I came across an interesting video on YouTube that I felt I would like to share on my blog. It is called 'In My Mind', and is a video made by a teenager with Asperger’s Syndrome, explaining to others what it is like to be him." AMiB's blog, An American Medic In Britain, documents his experience with the ancient and respected trade of medicine.

Laurie Edwards, whose blog, A Chronic Dose, explores living with multiple chronic conditions from the patient perspective, writes about themes of control, denial, and worrying when loved ones are sick in Who, Me Worry?

Amy Tenderich from Diabetes Mine, reviews Jill Sklar's new book The Five Gifts of Illness, which is about Survivorship.

Rachel's Wide World of Lunacy gets Flooded Back. "...the feelings of helplessness and despair came back - flooding me like a salad drenched in too much balsamic vinegar - an almost sickening, choked feeling."

Emergiblog provides tips on how not to feign illness in You Might Be a Faker If...

Adrian of One Version of Things tells us what got him interested in medicine as a child -- seeing his little sister almost die -- in One Sick Little Girl.

In Thanking You, type 1 diabetic Kerri Morrone from Six Until Me realizes the profound impact that a support system, specifically the blogosphere, has on her diabetes management.

Tangent 90 Degrees illustrates what life is like for family members who donate their loved ones' organs in Celebration and Remembrance.

At The Tangled Neuron, we learn about research showing that a systematic program of cognitive rehabilitation can help people with mild Alzheimer’s improve their ability to function, in Cognitive Rehabilitation For People With Alzheimer's and Dementia.
Top

WELLNESS
Enoch Choi advises us on how to keep from chopping off those digits in How Can I Keep From Cutting Myself While Preparing Food. [At first I thought it was about self-mutilators. -R]

Bertalan Meskó from ScienceRoll shows us a really cool idea in Second Life: the Virtual Medical Center: the Future of Medical Education. Go to medical school online.

Nancy Brown from Teen Health 411 gives us tips for dealing with tragedies like the Virginia Tech shooting.

Jolie Bookspan from The Fitness Fixer encourages us to Exercise Your Sense of Humor.

SharpBrains gives us tips on improving brain function in Easy Steps to Improve Your Brain Health Now and Mind and Life Institute.

Top


ETHICS
Interested Participant blogs about the serious civil liberty consequences of a bill in Congress to expand the registry of mental health adjudicants in National Database of the Mentally Ill. "After all, that's how Hitler was able to get his Aryan purity project launched." This is a nice summary of current meaning of the term "adjudication" and how redefinition could open the records of many patients.

In Midwest Med Student Meets East Coast Politics, Paige Hatcher writes about the Virginia Tech tragedy, and how insurance discriminates against people with mental illness, making it harder for folks to get help. She calls for U.S. residents to let their Representatives and Senators know that we want the Mental Health Parity bills passed.

Healthline's JC Jones writes about the post-Cho privacy vs. safety debate, in The Human Brain as a Deadly Weapon: Privacy Laws vs. Protecting the Public. "Maybe we need a VT law with a public database with all known persons with potentially violent tendencies..."

Our friend, Dr Anonymous, posts The Baby Emilio Debate, about a 17-month old child who "has a rare genetic disorder which will eventually end his life. An ethical debate is taking place in Texas and around the country having to do with end of life issues and who has the final say in these issues."

Eric Turkewicz, a New York Personal Injury Lawyer, posts about a different sort of illicit drug trade, in Counterfeit Drugs Update - Trying to Track The Goods.

Monash Medical Student mixes it up with medicine and religion in HIV, AIDS, Safe Sex & Fornication (the picture of the hot babe doing it with a spider gives new meaning to the term formication).

Rima Bishara in The Doctor Blogger provides the low-down on how the relationship between Doctors and Pharmaceutical Reps.

Vitum Medicinus goes even one further in You Thought The Pharmaceutical Industry Was Slimy Before Reading This Post? about how drug reps use techniques to get into our heads.

HG Stern at InsureBlog talks about the challenges of medical privacy and risks taken by health care providers who blog in The Flipside Of Empowerment.

Nick Jacobs from Hospital Impact describes hospitals which have the 7 Traits of a Highly Passive-Aggressive Organization.
Top


INTERPERSONAL
In Hooray for Hello Kitty and The Further Adventures of Hello Kitty TSCD writes about the challenge of efficient patient interviews. Also revealed: techniques for maintaining a straight face when people tell you bizarre or disgusting things.

Mother Jones from Nurse Ratched's Place writes about a moonlighting psychiatrist who winds up in Iraq in The Green Zone. "Dr. J. left a year ago and we haven’t heard from him since."

The Snarky Gerbil wonders what she will do if clients come to her garage sale in Privacy Please.

In Shaming The Patient, Susan Palwick from Rickety Contrivances of Doing Good wonders if telling patients to lose weight sometimes does more harm than good. "It's a lot harder to go to the doctor when you're ashamed of yourself, especially when you expect the doctor to try to make you feel more ashamed."

Are Fat Doctors Just Human? Kendra Campbell, from The Differential: Medscape Med Students Blogs, sees fat people in the Baltimore airport and wonders if doctors should put more emphasis on their own healthy living as an example for their patients. [P.S.: We know Fat Doctor is human, and we love her for it. -DCR]

PixelRN discusses a poll of Baltimore firefighters/EMS as to which hospital has the hottest nurses. Dinah wants to know which one has the hottest shrinks.
Top


INTERNET
Kevin, M.D. provides tips on improving your search engine reputation (SEO) in Google Yourself. He should know.

Health Psych gives us Suicide by Internet, about two Australian teens who died together of suicide; a reminder to all parents to read what your children write on FaceBook. "Most experts agree that during adolescence, it is critical is to beavailable to listen, be alert to warning signs and to keep the lines ofcommunication open, even though it may not always be easy to do so."

David E. Williams from the Health Business Blog writes about the Google Health initiative in Mr. Google comes to Washington. "I asked Bosworth whether he felt consumers had a role in determining their diagnosis –in partnership with their physicians– as well as their treatment."

Walter from Highlight Health provides us a list of Healthcare Self-Mangement Suggestions for e-Patients.

Joshua Schwimmer from Tech Medicine provides a 4-part tutorial on medical podcasts, including Intro, Part 2, Part 3, and Part 4 (of course, since Dr Schwimmer left out the best psychiatric podcast, My Three Shrinks, his post rates only a B minus, at best ;-) .
Top

--|May 8 Grand Rounds is at TBTAM (The Blog That Ate Manhattan),
--|where it is "dedicated to our favorite surgery registrar, Barbados Butterfly,
--|whose blog was unceremoniously taken down not too long ago. "

My Three Shrinks Podcast 18: Grand Rounds BYOB


If you are looking for the show notes, they're up above. To look at past episodes, with links. go to http://mythreeshrinks.com/.


This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.

Thank you for listening.