I participated long-distance in a social media workshop for the 2010 MedInfo conference (#medinfo2010) in Cape Town earlier this week. Kate Anthony and DeeAnna Nagel from the Online Therapy Institute were also participants, and the provided and excellent discussion of professional ethics, dual relationships, and good therapeutic behaviors as they relate to online interactions with patients and prior patients.
Excerpt:
Jane is your client. Both of you live and work in the same community. Jane is the director of a local charity. She sends you an invitation to be one of her contacts on LinkedIn.
Marcie is a former client. She was a teenager when you treated her. Several years later she has friended you on Facebook with a private message thanking you for being such a positive influence in her life.
John is a current client who has begun following you on twitter.  He has send you a direct message and has also sent you an @reply to one of your tweets. He recently posted a tweet stating what a great therapist you are with a link to your website.
Mary has been your client for over a year. She has a history of childhood abuse and you have encouraged her to write in a journal. You receive an email from her asking to change times for her next appointment. She closed her email with “By the way, the journal writing has been so helpful, I have decided to start a blog. Here’s the link! www.maryrevealsinherblog.com. You open the link to discover that her first blog entry contains emotionally charged and highly graphic information about past childhood sexual abuse she has not previously revealed in therapy.
Kim was your client for over a year. You have not heard from her in at least that long. She was often hostile during sessions and would call between sessions feigning crisis and then apologise for her behavior during the previous session. The reason for termination was due to her move out of the area. Today you do an internet search for your name and you see that Kim has created a website, www.bewareofbadtherapy.com. Your name is on the website’s blacklist with links to excerpts of verbatim chat transcripts from sessions you held with Kim online.
To listen to their responses to these scenarios, watch the video at http://www.onlinetherapyinstitute.com/ethical-implications-for-therapists/ (the weird sound effects at the beginning last about 20 seconds or so... just wait for them to stop, it's worth it... and you get to hear input from their Second Life cat, Reva).


It would be great to hear your experiences with this issue in the comments, whether as a patient or as a therapist.