You may have heard of a gratitude journal and wondered what it is and why would you create one.

What is a Gratitude Journal?
A gratitude journal is a daily diary where you write about the people, places and events in your life that you feel grateful about.

Keeping a Gratitude Journal

It can change your perspective about your life and the world around you, especially when you are feeling down or if you have developed a habit of looking at yourself and the world in a negative way.

It's Easy to Keep a Gratitude Journal
At the end of the day, write down 5 things that you feel grateful about. At first, you might feel that this would be a waste of time, but I invite you to do it for a week.

Even if, at first, you come up with 2 things, overtime, as you continue this process, you will probably begin to notice that you will start to come up with more and more items to write in your daily gratitude journal.

Your journal entries can be as basic as being grateful for the food you eat, your clothing, that you have a roof over your head or that you are alive.

How Can Keeping a Gratitude Journal Help You?
Keeping a gratitude journal helps you to be more aware of your view of yourself and the world around you:
Do you tend to see things as being mostly negative? 
Is the glass always half empty rather than half full? 
Do you tend to engage in all or nothing thinking? 
Are you overlooking the blessings in your life, no matter how simple they might be? 
Have you taken for granted friends and family who are loving and supportive?
As your awareness expands with your gratitude journal, you will probably begin to learn to let go of negative patterns of thinking that have held you back.

You may begin to feel more inspired to open yourself up to new opportunities. This is not about being a Pollyanna.

Remember, this is a process. Many of my clients have used the gratitude journal with success. It has helped them to overcome old negative habits that have kept them stuck and allowed them to have more of what they want in their lives.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist.  I work with individual adults and couples.

To find out more about me, visit my website: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006 or email me: josephineolivia@aol.com.