So I was born a Gemini. It's been part of my identity, always. I'm not much for astrology, and I don't check my horoscope, but it's something everyone knows about themselves, and sometimes it's fun. And interestingly enough, Gemini fits me to a tee.

Here, see if you agree. From Ganeshaspeaks.com:

Ruled as they are by the Planet Budha (Mercury), Mithuna ( Gemini ) exhibit a delicious brand of mercurial energy. They are quick thinking, quick-witted and fast on their feet. It's their curiousity and cleverness that make them such a hit at cocktail parties. But they are not just good talkers - they also love to listen and learn. However, any social setting is good enough for a Mithuna ( Gemini ) since these folks are charming, congenial, and love to share themselves with their friends. Mithuna ( Gemini ) mind drives them to talk, to converse and it is not always just idle chatter. They need more and more information to feed their intellectual inclinations. They probe endlessly for more information as the more it collects the better. They are supremely interested in developing their relationships. Sharing that knowledge later on with those they love is also a lot of fun. Mithuna ( Gemini ) are bright, quick-witted and is at the centre-stage in any party. Although rational and practical, they also have a surplus of imagination. However the fact that they are unsure which twin will show up half the time they are often considered fickle and restless. They can be moody and act on simple whims. While their effusiveness may be misconstrued as scheming by some, Mithuna ( Gemini ) generally have their hearts in the right place. It is this ample energy, which can also paint them as scatterbrained and unfocused but, behind all that restlessness, they are usually busy filing all that information away. Funny, brimming with life, full of ideas, adorable, inconsistent, capricious, superficial, they are a bundle of maddening contradictions. They may deal in everything and are 'know-alls', but at the same time they also have the ability to master skills. Mithuna ( Gemini ) are versatile and have an amazing grasp of the subject they choose, although it may not interest them for long. They prize intellect and consider it to be the key to all things. At work, they are the clearest of thinkers, suggesting logical and well-thought-out ideas which make them an asset to any team. Their greatest strength lies in their ability to communicate effectively and to think clearly. Adventures of the mind are what the Twins are all about. Bestowed with a cheerful face easily detectable from signs of anxiety, tension or unhappiness the Gemini face is a dead give-away when they try to hide sorrow behind their brand of wit and humour. If even for a short while, romancing a Gemini is likely to be interesting, adventurous and fun, but the fickle, almost uncaring attitude will manage to break many hearts before they finally settle down. Although affectionate Mithuna ( Gemini ) can be extreme flirts, But be sure that the partner shares the Mithuna ( Gemini ) sense of humour. Mithuna ( Gemini ) never stray if the family life is satisfying. However it is best not to rush headlong into marriage; give adequate thought before popping the question.

So apparently, Parke Kunkle, some guy in Minnesota (homeland of ClinkShrink, no less) decides that it's all wrong. Everything is off. Now I'm a Taurus. But I'm not a Taurus, I'm a Gemini. They want to stick me and ClinkShrink under the same stars? No way.

And here are the new dates:
Here are the new zodiac dates:

Capricorn: Jan. 20-Feb. 16
Aquarius: Feb. 16-March 11
Pisces: March 11-April 18
Aries: April 18-May 13
Taurus: May 13-June 21
Gemini: June 21-July 20
Cancer: July 20-Aug. 10
Leo: Aug. 10-Sept. 16
Virgo: Sept. 16-Oct. 30
Libra: Oct. 30-Nov. 23
Scorpio: Nov. 23-29
Ophiuchus: Nov. 29-Dec. 17
Sagittarius: Dec. 17-Jan. 20

Have you been blown away, too?

What will this mean in psychiatric practice? Will everyone's personality change? Will people come to talk about the shift between who they are and who they thought they were? Will they fight back? I know that I'm staying a Gemini.