EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing) is a form of psychotherapy that was developed by psychologist, Francine Shapiro, in the 1980s.

What is EMDR Therapy?
EMDR was originally developed to treat posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Since that time, EMDR has been used successfully for many other issues, including stress, insomnia, performance anxiety, performance enhancement, abuse, substance abuse, sexual addiction and many other issues.


EMDR Tends to Work Faster Than Talk Therapy for Trauma
Generally speaking, EMDR tends to work faster for trauma than most talk therapies. Of course, there are no guarantees. Among other things, much depends on the skill of the therapist as well as the rapport between therapist and client. Also, most clients will require a period of time where the EMDR therapist helps clents to develop internal resources and coping skills before the actual EMDR processing begins.

EMDR Uses a 3-Pronged Approach: Past, Present, Future
EMDR uses a three-pronged protocol: working with the client's past, present and future. EMDR processes old memories, creating new links with adaptive functioning.

Current problems are targeted and desensitized and past and future events are integrated to assist clients in healthy functioning. There has been quite a bit of research on the success of EMDR and the treatment of trauma and PTSD. However, no one is completely sure as to how or why EMDR works. It is believed that part of its success is due to the fact that EMDR uses Rapid Eye Movement (REM) as its basis.

EMDR helps process negative memories and emotions. It helps the brain to succesfully process these experiences.

To find out about EMDR, visit the EMDRIA website:  EMDRIA - The Professional EMDR Organization.

I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist who works with individual adults and couples.

To find out more about me, visit my website: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist.

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006 or send me an email.

Also see my articles:

How EMDR Works: EMDR and the Brain

How EMDR Works: Overcoming Emotional Trauma

What is Adjunctive EMDR Therapy?