[10] . . . [11] . . . [12] . . . [All]

We almost didn't make a podcast this week, as both Dinah and Clink were under the weather; but I brought my hazard suit and gel scrub and we managed to complete it. It did go a bit long, about 50 minutes.

February 18, 2007:


Topics include:


FDA Antidepressants Hearing, Revisited. We had previously blogged about suicide and antidepressants, followed by Roy's first-hand account of the December 2006 FDA hearing which Roy attended, where the committee voted to expand the black box warnings on antidepressants to indicate the risks of untreated depression and to mention the protective effects that antidepressants appear to have on older folks. The FDA has now released two transcripts of the hearing (Transcript 1 and Transcript 2), as well as the slide presentations from some of the speakers. These are excellent resources if you want to find out more on the subject. The recommended changes (see summary) to the black box include text to highlight the following:
increased risk of antidepressant-associated suicidal thoughts and behaviors up to around age 25
protective effect of antidepressants against suicidal thoughts and behaviors for older folks, particularly seniors
balancing language which points out the increased risks associated with NOT treating depression (eg, suicide rates have increased for children since the 2004 decision to add black box warnings for antidepressants)

Finland, Finland, Finland. The Finnish study that Dinah mentioned is discussed here. The Monty Python audio was found here.
The Zyprexa Documents. The FuriousSeasons blog details the concerns that Lilly is holding out on important information about its antipsychotic drug.
NYT: Bipolar toddler dead from medications. Raises questions about diagnosing severe mental illness in very young children.
Lovely Spam. on YouTube.
Q&A at mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom. Schizoid personality disorder: Is it real and does it predispose to schizophrenia? By Seamonkey. Diagnostic criteria. Pubmed review.
Amygdala size and eye contact in Autism.
Asperger's syndrome.

Next week: Side effects of psychotherapy; evolutionary psychopathology; what happens in Vegas.
Last week's musical snippet was from the 2000 release, Strangelove Addiction, from the self-titled album by Supreme Beings of Leisure.

Find show notes with links at:
http://psychiatrist-blog.blogspot.com/2007/02/my-three-shrinks-podcast-11-lovely-spam.html
This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review). You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com. Thank you for listening.