In a prior article, What's the Difference Between Fear and Anxiety?,  I discussed the difference between fear and anxiety.  In this article, I'm providing tips for coping with panic attacks.

Tips For Coping With Panic Attacks

What Are Panic Attacks?
A panic attack is usually caused by anxiety. Symptoms usually come on suddenly.  The most common symptoms can include:
shortness of breath
muscle spasms
choking sensation
nausea
irregular heartbeat
dizziness or lightheadedness
shaking
sweating
fatigue
tingling sensations in hands or feet 
feelings of foreboding
fear that you're losing your mind
fear that you're going to die

Not everyone gets every symptom.

If you're experiencing these symptoms, its important to see your medical doctor to rule out a medical cause.

Panic attacks can be debilitating.  Some people get occasional panic attacks, and others have chronic panic attacks.  I

Tips For Coping With Panic Attacks
If you have occasional panic attacks, relaxation, grounding and breathing exercises can be helpful.  See my articles for tips on how to cope with panic attacks:

Journal Writing to Relieve Stress and Anxiety
Learning to Stay Calm During Stressful Times
Finding Inner Peace During Uncertain Times
Self Care: Feeling Entitled to Take Care of Yourself
The Mind-Body Connection: Mindfulness Meditation
Self Reflection and Basic Mindfulness
Research Shows That Meditation Can Change Your Brain
Learning to Relax: Square Breathing
Staying Calm When You're in the Middle of Chaos
Finding Moments of Peace During Stressful Times
Self Soothing Techniques to Use When You're Feeling Distressed
Learning to Relax: Going on an Internal Retreat
Discovering the Quiet Place Within Yourself

Panic Attacks Can Get Worse If Untreated
People who have panic attacks often become afraid of when they will have the next panic attack.  For many people, this causes them to avoid certain activities, including going outside.

This avoidance causes its own problems.  For instance, panic attacks can include agoraphobia, a fear and avoidance of being out in public.  If someone develops panic attacks with agoraphobia, this is an obvious hindrance to maintaining a job and a social life.

If you have panic attacks, you could benefit from seeing a licensed mental health professional who has experience helping clients with panic attacks and other related problems with anxiety.

Getting Help in Therapy to Overcome Panic Attacks
For many people panic attacks get worse over time without treatment, so it's important to get help sooner rather than later (see my article: How to Choose a Psychotherapist).

A skilled psychotherapist can help you to overcome the debilitating effects of panic attacks, so you can live your life with a sense of well-being.

About Me
I am a licensed NYC psychotherapist, hypnotherapist, EMDR and Somatic Experiencing therapist who works collaboratively with clients and uses Integrative Psychotherapy to develop the best treatment plan for each client (see my article: The Therapeutic Benefits of Integrative Psychotherapy).

I work with individual adults and couples.

I have helped many clients to overcome panic attacks.

To find out more about me, visit my website: Josephine Ferraro, LCSW - NYC Psychotherapist.

To set up a consultation, call me at (212) 726-1006 or email me.