"In Treatment" begins on HBO tonight-- it's a series that will run nightly (and hey, I have no life, what else have I got to do?) . I'm going to try to post either during (can I do that?) or right after. I'll add the time as I write, and feel free to write comments as we go.
Warning: PLOT SPOILERS.

9:25 The excitement builds.

The patient cries. It isn't fun. She calls her doctor "Paul." She gets up and stumbles, he grabs her hand. Her nail polish is very red. Where did she leave her car? She sat outside for four hours in the dark before the session. He drapes her in a blanket. She talks about watching the minutes tick by on her cell phone. He is quite. She talks about her ambivalence about the session.
"What happened last night?"

She left Andrew. They drank.

The patient's name is Laura. "I did some terrible things last night."
Paul says it's okay if Laura vomits on his rug. Her phone rings in her very red purse. It's Andrew. Paul is wearing jeans. He doesn't let Laura take the call.
Andrew, it seems, has given her an ultimatum, they get married or he leaves, and she has 2 days to decide. Andrew cried. Laura was scared. Or she was angry. She feels manipulated. She smashed his laptop.

She went for a drink with a friend who dressed her in the little black dress she's worn to the session. Laura drank more and her friend left, and Laura met a guy-- probably a Republican--- he paid for her drinks. He followed her to a unisex bathroom. She had sex in the bathroom with the stranger. Way too many details. Suddenly thought of Andrew and he pees like a racehorse in the morning, sex aborted....more too many details...and then she thought about talking about this in therapy.

"And what did you imagine us saying?"

Patient worried that Therapist Paul would be disgusted. She confesses her behavior and leaves to vomit in his bathroom. Paul makes her tea.

Paul brings Laura back to talking about Andrew and points out to her that she was the one who delivered the ultimatum, "It sounds like you were the one who wanted to bring the relationship into crisis."

Laura gets angry. "I did no such thing." And suddenly Laura confesses to Paul that she's been unfaithful to Paul for a long time, "it's been here all along, you mean you've never noticed it." Oy. Obviously Laura is confessing her feelings for Paul and he doesn't get it. She wants Paul to hug her and confess his love. Paul looks only a little uneasy.

My daughter comments in real life: "These people are really messed up."

Laura is humiliated, Paul sits there like a Buddah. "You've become the center of my life."

"Laura, I'm your therapist, the parameters and limitations are established and ethically defined and not an option." Go for it Therapist Paul.

Laura talks about her fantasies about Paul. "I know it can never happen> I'm not going to boil your kids' rabbit." "The only thing that matters to me is you."

So far: it's not the Sopranos.
[Go to #2]