I've decided to start reading the Sunday New York Times in bed--- no electronic distractions and I actually sort of read. I love the internet, but I think it makes me crazy.

The NY Times has a feature on Debra Winger and talks about her acting come back in the role of Frances on In Treatment. Click here if you'd like to read it.

I'm reading a wonderful book, a memoir by Dr. Mark Vonnegut called Just Like Someone With Mental Illness Only More So. When I was a kid, I loved Kurt Vonnegut's novels. Unusual family with lots of genius and mental illness. I will write more about the book when I finish it, maybe later today?

Tried a great new pizza place last night. Trouble parking and I thought I'd never go there again, and then we ordered a boring pizza because we have topping-issues in my marriage. Great spinach salad, and as we waited for the pie, I coveted the pizza's around us with sausage, veggies, mushrooms, oh.... but then our Four Cheese Pizza arrived and it was amazing. We didn't even mind that we were by far the oldest people in the place, and I will definitely go again, maybe on a weekday. So here's a plug for Iggy's.

As for the rest of my day? Roy wanted me to go to lunch with him so he could convert me into someone who fully understands the details of an issue that has come up in our state with hospital reimbursements. The restaurant he chose isn't open on Sundays. Oh, and he's decided he's busy with one of his many other projects. Clink wanted to work on posting another podcast with me, but got a last minute invite to a birthday party and has blown me off. I've pointed out to her that she was on my "A" list as a first-choice friend for a Sunday afternoon. The day-before birthday party invite and she was clearly on that person's "B" list. Apparently, my company doesn't compare to the prospect of birthday cake.

Our little dog, Kobe, the hyperactive one, was shaved down yesterday in an event called grooming. I suggested husband take him to the Ravens Game (Kobe would like that) but was told, "As a comfort dog? Kobe is the farthest thing from a comfort dog."