You all remember Physical Education class (Phys Ed) back in school, right? I recall that it was always looked upon with great anxiety.

I see they now have a drug that helps with P.E. It's about time.

I think it was the performance anxiety... where you truly measured up next to the guy (or girl, I guess... wife tells me it was the same for her) next to you to compete on strength and endurance. Who can go farther, further? Who went the longest? Could I hold out 'til the end?

It wasn't easy. Your coach, with stopwatch in hand, would yell "Go!". You'd start the race, and before you knew it, it was all over. Those days in the gym were the worst hours of high school. It was so embarrassing. The apologies. The disappointment. And I know I wasn't alone. In fact, the article says that up to a third of men had this problem.
Globe&Mail: “We tend to think of this as, ‘Oh, it affects novices, the first time, and young people,' ” Dr. Pryor said Thursday from Minneapolis. “But no. There are some people who have this who are older, and oftentimes it affects them their entire lives.”

I hadn't thought that P.E. had such a prolonged effect on folks. I guess there's a kind of P.E. P.T.S.D. And this medicine helps. This drug, dapoxetine by ALZA, helped guys' stamina "last three, four times what they were before."

Just think of how that can relieve the anxiety of whether you can hold out long enough to go the distance. In football, you'd be able to finally score a touchdown. In baseball, you'd be able to steal third base and slide into home. Playing golf, you'd finally master your stroke and get a hole in one. In basketball, this drug would help you shoot the furthest. And surely, in cricket, you could manage the most sticky wicket.

Of course, we do have to temper our enthusiasm until further studies demonstrate the effectiveness of dapoxetine. Too often, the press goes off half-cocked about the latest fad drug. Let's not be too premature. However, I've already bought stock in ALZA, because when the FDA ...

...um... what's that?

It is?

Oh. Well, that's very different.

Never mind.