And Other Things You Don't Want to Know About Medicine

You deserve to know the truth. The truth is, your doctor may be telling jokes about you. Well OK, not necessarily about you, personally. But about medicine. About the experience of treating patients with common conditions in common circumstances. Stories about patients with unreasonable demands or unreasonable behaviors who come back repeatedly for repair after refusing to change the very things causing them problems. With regard to psychiatry, doctors who have been assaulted by a patient in seclusion may use humor to relieve the fear and anxiety associated with caring for a potentially violent person. In situations like this it's better to make a joke than to scream, throw up your hands and walk away.

Sometimes in psychiatry you work with patients who aren't very nice to you. They may be angry and they may say things that are hurtful. As professionals it is our responsibility to take this dispassionately and allow the patient to be honest about their feelings. We cannot snap back or be retributive or let this influence our judgement. Psychiatrists must be dispassionate, supportive, sensitive and empathic.

Frankly, that's hard work.

Humor is one way of dealing with this. People who read this blog know that we use humor a lot. We tell jokes about medications, about diseases, about the pitfalls of psychiatric practice and about each other. (Well OK, usually about Dinah but that's just because she leaves herself so gosh-darn open to it. And because she takes it so well. Believe me, she can give it as well as she takes it.) According to our readers' comments one of the things people like about this blog is that it gives them a behind-the-scenes glimpse of the human side of psychiatry. That may be disturbing to folks who don't want to think about their psychiatrists in that way.

Every physician at some point in time has used humor to mediate stress and vent frustration. Heck, even an entire television series was based on this premise. The legendary Hawkeye Pierce used humor and practical jokes to highlight the idiocy of military (and medical) bureacracy all the while giving terrific patient care. I imagine my opthalmologist, my dentist, my primary care doc and even my gynecologist have their own brand of behind-the-scenes humor that I as a patient have never heard. (I have to admit I've come up with a few thoughts on my own while straddling the stirrups. And here's an informal survey: how many of you have gynecologists who post cartoons on the ceiling above the exam table?)

Personally, if it keeps my dentist sane and available for me and helps him be more tolerant of me as a patient I'm all for it.

I'll bet he's laughing at how I walk.

**********


Warning: This blog features graphic scenes of psychiatric humor that may be disturbing to some readers. Reader discretion is advised.