Over on Saving Normal, psychiatrist-blogger Dr. Allen Frances has put up a thought provoking article called We Should All Be Ashamed.    Frances asserts that closing the state hospitals was the wrong thing to do : those patients now live on the streets and cycle through the jails.  We haven't freed them, he says, we've abandoned them.  Frances goes on to say that Dr. E. Fuller Torrey is right: our society needs laws that allow us to force those who need help into care and Representative Tim Murphy is right: we need to pass the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act -- one that mandates states to have programs for involuntary outpatient commitment.  

Frances concludes:
Is there any possible way to get this train back on track? First, implementing Tim Murphy’s Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act (H.R. 3717) would be a good start. Second, Congress should abolish the IMD (Institution for the Treatment of Mental Disease) exclusion. In fact, I personally believe that the federal government should get out of the mental illness treatment business altogether. They have been in this business since the passage of the CMHC legislation in 1963 and it has been all downhill. Let’s give the responsibility – and the federal money—back to the states and then hold the governors accountable for the results. They cannot do worse than we are doing now. Third, there needs to be further modification of state involuntary treatment laws and increased use of assisted outpatient treatment (AOT) and conditional release so that the small number of seriously mentally ill individuals who need these kind of services can be treated before they end up homeless or incarcerated. These three steps alone would go a long ways toward improving the treatment system."

Over the years, we've see lots of controversy about these topics on Shrink Rap and as you know, we are working on a book called Committed: The Battle Over Forced Psychiatric Care, so an article like this catches my attention.  

Surf over to Saving Normal, read the whole thing, and I'll invite you to return and comment here, if you'd like. 