My nephew wants to be a doctor. Specifically, a psychiatrist. What could I say? I'm biased, but I think it's a great choice. The world of medicine is pretty challenging these days and a doctor's lifestyle in training can be a grind, but if I had to do it over again I'd do the same thing. He's looking for a chance to get some additional research experience while he applies to grad school, so I agreed to put up a blurb for him. If anybody knows how he can do some interesting psych-related research in the Berkeley area (or online), for free or for pay, please comment here or drop an email. Here's what he has to say for himself:

Hello, world! This is the ClinkShrink's nephew, of roughly the same level of nerdiness but sans guinea pig obsession. :)

I recently graduated from Berkeley with a degree in molecular neurobiology (and one in architecture, of all things), and am currently paying off student loans working on a SAMHSA study (DAWN project) and writing policy for the city of Berkeley while applying for MPH programs for fall 2009. I have the goal of getting an MD or PhD after that. I'm fixed pretty firmly in Berkeley for at least the next year, but would be interested in helping out--for pay or volunteer--in some additional research work via telecommuting.

Clink suggested the blog could be a means of finding out about these opportunities.

My primary interests lie in tying emotional/cognitive psychology to neurobiology, particularly where clinical treatments and disorders are involved. I certainly wouldn't turn down other interesting psych work, though, and just in case you were curious, my dream Nobel Prize would come from elucidating a physiological basis for consciousness (whatever that may end up meaning).

For the physicians out there, I'm much more interested in internal medicine and therapy treatments than surgical intervention, but again at this point I'm not ruling anything out off the bat. Email ShrinkRapBlog at gmail.com or comment here if you know of any thing like this, and Clink will forward the info to me.

Cheerio, and thanksa!