[19] . . . [20] . . . [21] . . . [All]

We had to do something a little different this week. We three shrinks were all busy ... Mother's Day weekend, yard work, Longwood Gardens, and luaus kept us too busy to get together to do a podcast. I insisted that we find a way to do it online, so I FINALLY convinced Dinah that even she could do it ;-)

Ten o'clock last night, it all came together, and we were able to do a podcast, thanks to Talkshoe. (If you haven't checked out Talkshoe, do it. It lets you podcast by phone!) As luck would have it, a storm came through and turned the transformer down the street into a Fourth of July celebration. Despite being without power, we still managed to get it done. Is that dedication, or what?

So, here ya go. It is a little rough, as we weren't sure what we were doing (what else is new?), and recording it via cell phone caused occasional lags and silent periods... hmm, just like psychotherapy.
May 13, 2007: #20 Mother Talkshoe

Topics include:
Happy Mother's Day!
Turkewicz law blog a hit with Clinkshrink. Her recommendations? Malpractice Primer and Economics.
Q&A: Zoe Brain asks "Is there a Standard of Care for GIDNOS in the case where the patient is intersexed? And does the degree of intersex affect the therapeutic regime, and if so, how? I'm familiar with the WPATH (Formerly HBIGDA) v6 SOC for GID. But once a diagnosis of GIDNOS is established, the SOC does not appear to apply."
Answer: Huh? (We did the best we could.) Also, see Farmer v. Brennan.
APA says people with Medicare Part D having trouble getting their psychiatric medications. Also, discussion of the "donut hole."
Medical Truth in Advertising bill: Is your "doctor" really a doctor?
Ethical conundrums: trains and Tarasoffs and guns (oh my!). Also, Maryland's problematic law requiring reporting of childhood abuse, even if you are now 90 or you don't know who the perpetrator is. And, what do you do with a dead astronaut on the way to Mars?
If Dinah had Lost It in Space, she Wishes she would have a Crystal Ball.
A shrink like me?



Find show notes with links at: http://mythreeshrinks.com.
This podcast is available on iTunes (feel free to post a review) or as an RSS feed. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com.

Thank you for listening.