First, Roy wants your opinion about Online Access to Prescription History, so if you haven't chimed in, please do.

This post was inspired by ClinkShrink's post, I Don't Want To Talk, where she discusses mandated debriefing after trauma and what role that might have in either preventing or causing mental illness (Roy: which is what we spent all of podcast #46 talking about).

Disaster Psychiatry is a field that it still defining itself. It's a close-to-home issue for me because Shrink Rap was started as a way for me to deal with some residual angst I had after returning from a couple of weeks in Louisiana where I worked on the Katrina Assistance Project. Roy & Clink got sucked in, but what can I say? At that time, I wrote a piece about my experiences and posted on it's own blog link. I talked a bit about the stuff ClinkShrink discusses-- some history of the Mitchell Model of Critical Incident Stress Debriefing, as well as Sally Satel's paper on how the mental health industry exploited the terrorist attacks of September 11th. You can click HERE to link to my Katrina Reflections.

Since ClinkShrink wants to talk about mandatory debriefing and whether talking about a trauma lessens it's impact and prevents the development of future psychopathology, I'll talk about my own thoughts about the role of psychiatry in the aftermath of a community trauma.You can define community in a big or small way, but I mean a shared experience as opposed to a traumatic act to a single individual .

There are five concerns from a shrink's point of view. There may be more, but these are my random thoughts and it's our blog. Do chime in on the comment section.
There are people with psychiatric disorders who may no longer have access to treatment-- perhaps because they need to relocate, because their doctor &/or records have been obliterated, their pharmacy closed down-- and they are at risk for a relapse of a pre-existing illness.
There are people who develop psychiatric disorders as a direct result of stress-- it's not unheard of for people to become manic after the death of a relative, to become anxious or depressed, and so if psychiatric symptoms are precipitated without disasters, it's safe to assume they can be precipitated by trauma. Certainly, some of these people may have underlying disorders that would eventually be unmasked anyway.
There are people who develop psychiatric disorders as a direct result of the specific trauma who may not have ever required the services of the mental health profession if such an event didn't occur. The question here, and the one that ClinkShrink addressed, is whether early interventions to the entire population alter the likelihood that someone will develop a psychiatric illness. Who to target, what to target them with, and if it will matter are all questions to address
There are people who are distressed by an objectively distressing event but who don't (and hopefully won't) develop a psychiatric condition. These people often feel a need to talk and are well-served by friends, family, and religious leaders. The role for psychiatrists here is one that should be taken only if the trauma victim identifies himself as a patient and requests treatment. There seems to be a statement in our society that it's bad to not talk about troubling things-- this is true for some people who feel a need to talk, but it's a blanket statement that often crosses the line into being judgmental.
Lastly, there is question as to the role mental health professionals should take with disaster workers who go to the aid of the victims. We're back to the Critical Incident Stress Debriefing and I wonder if the issues are different for those who are in the position of being helpers voluntarily (Red Cross workers and assorted humanitarians) versus those who go as a job requirement-- fire fighters and the like. I'm not sure what to say here. Again, this speaks to the issue of interventions to prevent the development of disorder in a population that might remain healthy without intervention.
Ugh, I can't get a picture in. Open all those alligator mouths and yap it up for me.