[8] . . . [9] . . . [10] . . . [All]

We decided to listen to Sophizo's suggestion and set up an email address for listeners to send questions to, and we will answer a couple in each podcast (starting with Podcast #11). We won't be able to answer them all, and we will not be able to answer any personal clinical questions. Send an email to mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom.
Also, feel free to go to iTunes and write a review (we had one, but it disappeared). We now have over 300 regular listeners (wow!), so maybe someone has something to say about us (maybe even something nice).
Last request: Dinah is only up to mid-season 2 in Lost, so she requests you post no spoilers for her on our blog, or she will be Positively Lost.

February 4, 2007:
Topics include:
AJP: Genetics of depression. Two related articles in this month's Green Journal are from the GenRED study (Genetics of Recurrent Early-onset Major Depression). The Levinson article reports significant linkage for an area on chromosome 15 in 631 families with recurrent early-onset major depression ("early onset"=<40 yrs old). The Holmans article reports results of a genome scan in 656 families, finding significant linkage in areas of chromosomes 8, 15, and 17.
Mandatory screening for depression? Clink conducts a thought exercise.
Blogs & Identity. We talk about Dr. Anonymous' recent troubles after Fox News brands his one of 5 great medical blogs, and our feelings about blogging behind anonymous names (or not). See Dr A's post on the Myth of Anonymous Blogging. Moof's post is also worth reading on this topic. (We suspect his video blog may have given away his identity.) We look forwards to the congressional hearings on who leaked his identity and how high up this thing goes.
Whither Public Psychiatry? Where have all the public sector psychiatrists gone? The number of HPSAs (Health Professional Shortage Areas) have decreased, while there seems to be less physician trainees who accept partial payment of their educational costs in return for a pledge to work in a HPSA after completing their training. But, Maryland has the most psychologists per capita in the US. (Search for Maryland psychiatrists at mdpsych.org.)
Questions for us? Email at mythreeshrinksATgmailDOTcom. We'll answer some starting with Podcast #11 (in two weeks).

Next week: Biochemical effects of chocolate on mood (we really mean it this time). Also false positive drug tests, and children of psychiatrists.
Last week's musical snippet was from the 1986 release, Modigliani (Lost in Your Eyes), from their eponymous album by Book of Love [lyrics].


Find show notes with links at:

http://psychiatrist-blog.blogspot.com/2007/02/my-three-shrinks-podcast-9-my-three.html
This podcast is available on iTunes. You can also listen to or download the .mp3 or the MPEG-4 file from mythreeshrinks.com. Thank you for listening.


technorati tags:speed, genetics, depression, GenRED, chromosome, blogs, podcast, public, psychology, psychiatry, psychiatrist, AJP, article
Blogged with Flock