[posted by dinah]

This is the thing, while blogging is no longer ruining my life, and Shrink Rap is simply a blog, it continues to bring me satisfaction. I like having somewhere to come when something stirs me up. I like having an outlet to write -- I've said this before, but hey, repetition is part of the deal in psychotherapy, and while writing blog posts isn't "psychotherapy" it is therapeutic. One should take satisfaction and joy where one can find it, even if that means eating chocolate with friends while you talk about things you know nothing about, into some strange looking microphone that looks like something out of a sci fi movie and then you take pictures of your feet.

This is the other thing, I don't try to find topics to write about, I wait until I get hit by a wave of inspiration. The funny thing is, I seem to get hit by these inspiring waves at moments when I'm not near a computer. I'll get an idea. Then I'll get another idea. Then I'll get a third idea. Then when I'm near a computer, and either I can't get into the Dashboard (help, it's demanding I update to NEW blogger--Roy says not yet, and then he vanished under the floorboards) or my ideas have vanished.

So, I'm pleased I could get into the dashboard today. I'm sure what I wanted to say. I keep meaning to write about the importance of the relationship in psychotherapy, though I'm not sure what it is, exactly, that I want to say. That, you may have noticed, has never stopped me before. We're waiting on Roy for a 3 Blogger post on why we love psychiatry. I even linked it to a cute little poem. Roy hasn't finished yet, and I imagine he'll let me know when he has.

I've thought of asking if anyone one out there, say all those editors at Doubleday, wants to publish my latest novel? I'm a bit lost, though it's been mailed off to New York. I've been at it too long to let myself feel hopeful.

If you don't hear from us for a while, it's because I can't get in to post. I'm not sure how it happened today, yesterday I couldn't get access at all. Oh, and it didn't help that ClinkShrink had comcast problems.

Really just rambling. Thank you for listening.