The recent mass murders in Afghanistan and the analysis of the events in the press highlight my contention from an earlier post that the press really does not do a good job in these situations. We can expect a continued exhaustive risk factor analysis and discussions by various pundits. The accused soldier clearly had a lot of exposure to combat stress, there is a history of traumatic brain injury, there is a possible history of substance abuse, and there are multiple psychosocial factors. So far we have seen the statements by people who knew him describing this event as completely unpredictable based on his past behavior. The debate will become more polarized as the lawyers get involved. The real truth of the matter is never stated.

What we know about these incidents is more accurately described by anthropologists than psychiatrists or psychologists. The best book written on this subject is Lawrence Keeley’s War Before Civilization.  In that book Dr. Keeley explores the contention that primitive peoples were inherently peaceful compared to modern man and a warfare that was waged was brief, fairly nonlethal, and stereotypic. In order to explore that theory, Dr. Keeley ends up writing a fairly definitive book on the anthropology of warfare. There are more lessons in that book about war and peace then you will ever hear on CNN or in the risk factor analysis that is produced in the popular media.

So what do we know about the mass murder of civilians during warfare? The first thing we know is that it is commonplace. It happens in every war and no military force despite their level of training is immune to it.  In prehistoric times, the most frequent scenario was a surprise attack on a village with the goal of killing as many inhabitants as possible. In Keeley's review, that number was generally around 10% of the population and that could have devastating consequences for a particular tribe including the complete dissolution.

Keeley also makes the point that: “Only the "rules of war," cultural expectations, and tribal or national loyalties make it possible to distinguish between legitimate warfare and atrocities.”  He gives the examples of Wounded Knee and My Lai as well as larger scale bombings of Hiroshima and Dresden.  My Lai was a highly publicized incident from my youth. It occurred during the Vietnam War when the US Army massacred hundreds of Vietnamese noncombatants – largely women, children, and old men.  In that situation, 26 soldiers were charged and only one was convicted. The convicted soldier served 3 1/2 years under house arrest.

In addition to outright killing, mutilations of bodies and the taking of body parts as trophies continue to occur in modern civilized warfare in much the same way that these practices occurred in primitive warfare.  Haley reported on a series of Vietnam veterans seen in psychotherapy and the special problems that exist in patients who have been exposed to or participated in wartime atrocities. Based on the literature at the time she suggested that the war in Vietnam resulted in a disproportionate number of atrocities.

My current final analysis of the situation is that there are important social and cultural determinants of war and the inevitable wartime atrocities. Risk factor analysis and analysis of individual biology is very unlikely to provide an explanation for what occurred. The moral, legal, and political environment has changed since Vietnam and that is obviously not a deterrent. A comparison of the final legal charges and penalties in this case with what happened in Vietnam will be instructive in terms of just how far those changes come. If there is a conviction, there will be a lot of pressure to portray the convicted soldier as very atypical and probably as a person who underwent a significant transformation of his conscious state.  There will be many theories. The idea that this transformation predictably occurs during warfare will not be discussed. I have already heard some experts talking about the thousands of soldiers who go though similar situations and seem to do just fine.

The best approach to these events is a preventive one that includes minimizing the exposure to war instead of being involved in the longest war in American history.  I don't expect that much will be said about that either.

George Dawson, MD

Lawrence H. Keeley. War Before Civilization. Oxford University Press, 1997.

Haley SA. When the patient reports atrocities. Specific treatment considerations of the Vietnam veteran. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1974 Feb;30(2):191-6.