www.preventyourpanic.com If you have severe anxiety disorder and you re looking for a treatment option that actually works, visi
Severe Anxiety Treatment eHow.com
www.preventyourpanic.com If you have severe anxiety disorder and you're looking for a treatment option that actually works, visit PreventYourPanic.com right now for all my free video tips
Severe Social Anxiety Symptoms The Social Phobia Treatment
Severe Anxiety
SEVERE ANXIETY DISORDER Treatments For Anxiety OCD Treatment
Severe Social Anxiety Symptoms The Social Phobia Treatment
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/severe-anxiety-disorder-treatment
Related video about Severe Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Severe Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Severe Anxiety Disorder Treatment preventyourpanic-com If you have severe anxiety disorder and youre looking for a treatment option that actually works visit Severe Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Commonly question about Severe Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Question :
What is the best treatment for severe depression/anxiety disorder?
Answer :
Psychotherapy. Antidepressants are important but usually there is no use of taking antidepressants on their own. For severe depression and anxiety it s usually best to have a combination of antidepressant + psychotherapy treatments. The medication will relieve your symptoms while psychotherapy will help you get to the roots of your anxiety and depression and to resolve the problems. One thing that most conventional doctors don t pay attention to is the overall health of your body. Try to improve your health using natural medicine like homeopathy and chiropractic.
Source(s):
I m a psychologist.
Question :
What are some practical jobs for some one with severe anxiety disorders?
I am a 17 year old high school graduate, and I am currently looking for employment to help pay for college in the fall. However, I have severe social anxiety disorders, and treatments involving counseling or medications have not been effective.
My biggest issue is that I cannot handle money; therefore, I cannot deal with interactions in which I am working a cash register. I am able to have social interactions with many people, but I prefer to be in settings in which I am either alone or with SMALL groups of people.

Any ideas? Are online surveys and such reliable?
Answer :
Bio-molecular nuclear engineering physicist...
Question :
I am 22 years old.I was recently diagonosed with OCD and severe anxiety disorder.?
I had my treatment for 6 months and still feel the same.How do i reduce my anxiety.
Answer :
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a chronic anxiety disorder most commonly characterized by obsessive, distressing, intrusive thoughts and related compulsions.

The naturally occurring sugar inositol may be an effective treatment for OCD. Inositol appears to modulate the actions of serotonin and has been found to reverse desensitisation of the neurotransmitter s receptors. St John s Wort has been claimed to be of benefit due to its (non-selective) serotonin re-uptake inhibiting qualities, and studies have emerged that have shown positive results. However, a double-blind study, using a flexible-dose schedule (600-1800 mg/day), found no difference between St John s Wort and the placebo. Studies have also been done that show nutrition deficiencies may also contribute to OCD and other mental disorders. Certain vitamin and mineral supplements may aid in such disorders and provide the nutrients necessary for proper mental functioning.