Berkeley, California (PRWEB) January 11, 2012 The Just Do The Writing Accountability Circle helps creative and non-fiction writers face the challenges o
... Your Brand: Social Media Denver Marketing Agency 5280 Creative
Berkeley, California (PRWEB) January 11, 2012
The Just Do The Writing Accountability Circle helps creative and non-fiction writers face the challenges of writing on a daily basis by providing an online social accountability network to help writers track their writing progress and receive coaching and peer support.
With the popularity of short-term writing programs like Novembers NaNoWriMo and Aprils Script Frenzy, two month-long writing sessions that happen online, its clear that getting social support and camaraderie around writing is inspirational to many writers.
But while writing furiously for a month can be exciting and a lot can be accomplished, it may also be a recipe for exhaustion and writers burnout. Also, what happens afterward? Are the novels and scripts getting completed? Or are they put back on the shelf when regular life takes over again?
To meet long term writing goals, like completing a novel, building a library of spec scripts, or developing a body of other creative writing, experts like Julia Cameron recommend a practice of consistent, daily writing.
But for the average writer - even if seasoned - that may be easier said than done. Creative fears, self-doubt, creative blocks, second novel syndrome, lack of time, procrastination, isolation, major life transitions, and other creative challenges get in the way. Even successful writers will tell you there are days when scrubbing the toilets or polishing the floors suddenly becomes incredibly fascinating.
The Just Do The Writing Accountability Circle - aka the Writers Circle - is an online system run by creativity coach and writer Jenna Avery, who is determined to help writers make the commitment to daily writing, even in the midst of living regular, busy lives.
During recurring four week long sessions of the Writers Circle, members log on to a unique website where they publicly announce their writing goals to their small group of peers and coaches and report back about their progress by answering a series of questions at least 5 days of every 7.
... and Social Media Needs Writers - by Joanna Penn The Creative Penn
writers i found when searching more creative descriptive keyword ...
social networking for authors
How to find free creative commons pictures online
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/creative-writers-use-online-social-accountability-for-daily-motivation-to-just-do-the-writing
Related video about Creative Writers Use Online Social Accountability For Daily Motivation to 'Just Do the Writing'
Procrastination
Procrastination mechanism for coping with the anxiety associated with starting or completing any task or decision Other psychologists indicate that anxiety is Creative Writers Use Online Social Accountability For Daily Motivation to 'Just Do the Writing'
Commonly question about Creative Writers Use Online Social Accountability For Daily Motivation to 'Just Do the Writing'
Question :
3.233 GPA? How bad is it, and what should I do?
Alright, so I m currently a sophomore in high school, and I checked my grades online, and my cumulative GPA is currently: 3.233.

Last year I took:

spanish year 1
orchestra
geometry
honors english
honors social studies
9th grade world science

This year as a sophomore I m taking

Orchestra
Spanish year 2
AP Bio
Algebra 3/4
Honors English
Honors Social Studies

I calculated it out, and if I want to get a 3.8 GPA by the time I graduate, I would have to get 4.0 s for the rest of my time in high school, which is very far fetched, because I m terrible at math. What is the LOWEST GPA you need to get into a good university, not a "decent" one, or a really prestigious one, but just a good one that will help me get a good job.

I m very creative, artistically & musically talented, and an excellent writer; so I wanted to go to a good school that would get me a job that could allow me to use those skills in my job (I was thinking about going into advertisement) but now I m worried that I m not going to be able to do anything with my life, because of my terrible GPA!!

Is a 3.8 GPA really that much better than something like a 3.6 GPA in the eyes of colleges?
Answer :
It is not that bad... just STUDY STUDY STUDY and do your best
Question :
Please look over my resume? Will I be hire or tossed in the trash pile?
I m hoping this will only need a few more changes. What do you think?
Would you hire me vs. other new college grads?

thx


Attention (insert name here):

I am interested in pursuing the job opening in your marketing department, because my experience and enthusiasm to diversify my skills will compliment your companys overall goal to promote brand awareness and improve customer relations.

I am passionate about the opportunities I pursue and am confident that my experience in marketing, social media, sales, and journalism will make me a good fit for your company.

Since 2008, I developed and self-managed a successful online jewelry and collectibles business, where I was awarded Ebay Power Seller status for my consistency with good customer service and high quality merchandise. I also developed and managed a Website for a family owned construction company that required proficient use of applications like Cyberduck and iweb. By developing flyers and business cards that I distributed at local events I helped the company build community exposure and expand its building contracts for an additional year.

Recently, I served as a content writer and copy editor for the Rescue Missions monthly newsletter. Part of my duties included writing copy for a 20,000+ audience, performing editing duties for the CEO and other executive staff, and designing and managing a smaller biweekly newsletter for the Rescue Mission Youth Program. Working with the organization required proficiency of Microsoft Office Suite, the creative ability to cultivate and successfully manage an online blog that raises awareness of child homelessness, and good knowledge of the Associated Press writing style. Among the rewards was building a loyal readership for the Rescue Missions social media channels and attaining a celebrity endorsement via his Facebook fan page.

My principle goal is to invest myself into an enterprise Im passionate about, and to diversify my skills along the way. I am a firm believer that education does not stop after college and that striving for self-improvement in my career and my personal life will maximize my ability to approach goals successfully.

I look forward to speaking with you in the coming weeks about how I can help promote your marketing team.

Best Regards,

Stacey XXX

PS: I will follow up in two weeks to confirm that you received this material, and to inquire about setting up an interview.
Answer :
This is a typical cover letter and not a Resume. The cover letter requires improvements.

I have the ability to help you with each, if you would like. However doing so is very time consuming; thus I would like a donation for my efforts. I have made many successful resumes and cover letter for family and friends using several costly resources that I have available. I also have a bestie that is a certified resume writer and she can look it over if any corrections are needed. If you use a professional, it would cost $700. and upwards.

Hint #1: It is best in a cover letter for you to catch their attention quickly.
Hint # 2: You must limit the use of the "I" word because it is a guaranteed cover letter rejection if used as much as you have above.
Hint #3 Remember, You ARE SELLING YOURSELF for a job that you want and are the best canidate for the position, so they need to know you are confident in yourself.
Question :
Please eval my cover letter?
I just graduated college and am going crazy not working. Can you overview this and tell me if you think an employer will consider this a quality entry level cover letter? Do you think I will fare well? What would you change? I don t want to undersell myself, but I don t want to sound arrogant either lol. thx





Attention Hiring Manager:

I am interested in pursuing the job opening in your marketing department, because I think my credentials and enthusiasm to diversify my experience will compliment your companys overall goal to promote brand awareness and improve customer relations.

I am passionate about the accolades I pursue and am confident that my experience in marketing, social media, sales, and journalism will make me a good fit for your company.

Since 2008, I developed and self-managed an online business that specializes in collectibles and fine jewelry. I also developed and managed a Website for a family owned construction company that required proficient use of applications like Cyberduck and iweb.

Recently, I served as a content writer and copy editor for the Rescue Missions monthly newsletter. Part of my duties included writing copy for a 20,000+ audience, performing editing duties for the CEO and other executive staff, and designing and managing a smaller biweekly newsletter for the Rescue Mission Youth Program. Working with the organization required proficiency of Microsoft Office Suite, the creative ability to cultivate and successfully manage an online blog that raises awareness of child homelessness, and good knowledge of the Associated Press writing style.

My principle goal is to invest myself into an enterprise I feel passionate about, and to diversify my skills along the way. I am a firm believer that education does not stop after college and that striving for self-improvement in my career and my personal life will make me a better person and improve my ability to approach goals successfully.

I am excited to learn more about what your company has to offer, and if you think I will be a good fit for your team.


Best Regards,
Answer :
I think it s pretty good. It s spelled and punctuated correctly and reads well. There s a fine line between confidence and arrogance and I think you re on the proper side by not making a lot of claims or promises. Baseball pitcher Dizzy Dean said, "It s not bragging if you can back it up".

I might change a couple of minor things, though. Mainly, I d change any emphasis on what the company can do for you onto what you bring to the table. I don t understand the sentence, "I am passionate about the accolades I pursue . . . ". I don t know what that means, but it seems like your primary goal is to be praised, rather than to contribute to an organization, which I m pretty sure isn t the case.

I like the body of the letter and the way you listed the work you ve done and the skills you have.

The last line about what the company has to offer could be changed to something like, "I am excited to learn more about opportunities your company may have and how I can contribute to your marketing team." It makes it seem less like they re doing something for you and that you re willing and ready to do something for them. You always want to emphasize your ability and willingness to contribute to the organization.

The goal of a cover letter is to get your resume read by a hiring manager, to set up an interview, and separate yourself from the crowd of other applicants. I think yours is pretty close, and even if you sent it as is, would probably be okay, but I don t know about you, but I m never satisfied with okay. Okay is for other people. It seems like you have higher aspirations and the drive to achieve them.
Source(s):
Went through career transition a couple of years ago and have been involved in the hiring process. I ve received a lot of excellent professional coaching and advice. Monster http://www.monster.com has a lot of articles about all aspects of a job search that you may find helpful, too. Good luck, I think you ll go far. It seems like things are picking up and slowly coming around. Companies are always looking for young, enthusiastic, and creative people with your skills.