by opensourceway Alzheimer s disease is a group disorders involving the parts of the brain that control thought, memory, and language. Alzheimer s d
Cause Symptoms treatment of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease ...

by opensourceway
Alzheimer's disease is a group disorders involving the parts of the brain that control thought, memory, and language. Alzheimer's disease is becoming tragically common. It is estimated that there are currently 18 million people worldwide with Alzheimer's disease. Dementia is a disease of the nervous system characterized by loss of certain mental abilities. This loss is severe enough to interfere with normal activities and lasts at least six months. Dementia is the term for the deterioration of brain function that results in loss of memory, reduced language skills, impaired reasoning and behavioural and emotional problems. As the disease develops, a person loses the ability to carry out familiar tasks, to reason, and to exercise judgment. Moods, personality, and ability to communicate may also be affected. People with AD typically die within eight years of their diagnosis. Some individuals may die within a year of diagnosis, others may live as long as twenty years.
Alzheimer's disease is progressive, which means that symptoms worsen over time. Language difficulties also are common in people with Alzheimer's disease. People with Alzheimer's can lose their sense of time and place - they may, for example, get dressed in the middle of the night or walk off and get lost. New surroundings and new people may be confusing. The disease typically progresses to the stage where it is difficult for the patient to be understood by others or to understand others, and in the final stages, the patient is bedridden. Free radicals are another factor in the formation of tangles and plaques. Free radicals are very active chemicals that form in the brain and damage brain cells. Chemicals known as antioxidants react with and destroy free radicals. Unfortunately there is no cure for Alzheimer's. However, drugs can help to slow down the progression or relieve some symptoms and delay the need for residential care. Other therapies and support are available.
Causes of Alzheimers Disease
The exect causes of alzheimers disease are currently not known. Alzheimer's is caused by a loss of brain cells, as well as changes in the cerebral cortex. Free radicals are another factor in the formation of tangles and plaques. Free radicals are very active chemicals that form in the brain and damage brain cells. Chemicals known as antioxidants react with and destroy free radicals. Another risk factor is heredity. People whose family members have had AD are more likely to develop Alzheimer's disease than those whose families do not have this history. People who have hypothyroidism or have experienced head injuries are also at relatively high risk for AD. Environmental factors have sometimes been proposed as possible causes for Alzheimers disease.
Symptoms of Alzheimers Disease
The earliest symptom of Alzheimer's disease is memory loss. Memory loss by itself is not an indication that a person has Alzheimer's disease. Some memory loss is a natural part of growing old. People with Alzheimer's can lose their sense of time and place - they may, for example, get dressed in the middle of the night or walk off and get lost. In early stages of the disease, family or friends may notice changes in behaviour. As the disease progresses, memory loss gets worse and some people have difficulty in learning new skills. Changes in behaviour may become more obvious, with people saying or doing things that are out of character. Some people become depressed because they realise what is happening to them. During the late stages of the disease, people with Alzheimer's may become totally dependent on others for their care. Walking can become difficult and urinary incontinence may develop.
Treatment of Alzheimers Disease
Cause Symptoms treatment of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease ...
Alzheimers Disease Causes, Symptoms and Treatment AllinfoDir ...
Alzheimers Disease: Symptoms and treatment
Alzheimer Disease Symptoms & Causes Alzheimer's Disease Symptoms ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/alzheimers-disease-causes-symptoms-and-treatment
Related video about Alzheimers Disease - Causes, Symptoms and Treatment
Alzheimers Disease - Natural Ayurvedic Home Remedies
Alzheimers Disease - Natural Ayurvedic Home Remedies Treat alzheimers disease with natural home remedies using either peppermint oil sesame oil or almonds For complete information check this Alzheimers Disease - Causes, Symptoms and Treatment
Commonly question about Alzheimers Disease - Causes, Symptoms and Treatment
Question :
Mad cow Disease, Prion?
Can someone help me answer a couple of questions, heres what i m supposed to answer. what causes Mad cow disease? How is it transmitted? What are its symptoms? Whats the diagnosis (how do you know you have it)? Is there a treatment? Is there a vaccine? What is the prognosis?


Heres what I have answered If anything is wrong or you think I should add something please tell me

The causative agent is is a misfolded protein called a prion
It can only be transmitted by eating meat, or somehow consuming the prion.
Symptoms are very similar to that of Alzheimers Diesease and can also cause personality changes, demensia, and hallucinations, also causes porous holes in the brain.
There is no treatment for Mad Cow disease.
There is no Vaccine for it
And the prognosis is death.


Any additional information or corrections would be great because i have to do a report on this.
Answer :
I think you re doing great! Maybe you could add some of the visible changes in the affected being.
Question :
Is this OCD, depression, or Psychosis?
A brief history of the situation is this:
Years ago I went through a serious bout of depression. I had fits of rage and crying and purposely avoided friends and places I enjoyed. A doctor put me on Lexapro, and antidepressant. I got better. years later, I have a new problem. I thought it was the same old depression with a new twist. but it s not.

My last psychiatrist tried treating me for a problem I had. he diagnosed it as depression and said that I also had OCD. This was because I had a depressed mood and frequently battled thoughts of anxiety.

This doctor tried me on a few different medications. Either they had no effect or they had terrible effects. They made me more depressed, anxious, and at one point suicidal. They were all small doses, but they showed their effects within days. The drugs that had these disastrous effects were Imipramine and Lexapro.

I m seeing a new doctor now. This one says the root problem is NOT depression or OCD. He says it s psychosis. His reasons for his diagnosis are this:

The obsessive negative thoughts are a manifestation of the paranoia attribute of psychosis. These thoughts include worrying about getting diseases, worrying about dying tomorrow from something, worrying about aging or getting alzheimers, worrying about thinning on top, worrying about getting diabetes, worrying that I might be schizophrenic, worrying that I got braindamage from the smell of a dry-erase marker, the list goes on and on. Some of these are too irrational to list. Some days they re tollerable, other days they make me anxious, even cry, or prevent me from doing my work.

Another symptom that I had described to both doctors was the fact that nearly every task that I start, or even think about starting, causes me stress and anguish as if it were some daunting job having to clean up after a hurricane. This is true for nearly everything I do including things I enjoy doing. Hanging out with friends, just watching a movie alone, or painting which I love to do will sometimes feel this way and compell me to avoid these things.

The first doctor said that this anxiety over starting things was possibly ADD. He tried me on ritalin for that with equally disastrous results. Then he tried me on neuropheedback treatment. It improved my memory, that I am sure of. The second Doctor said that symptom was also due to psychosis because it shows there are two thoughts fighting eachother simultaneously with each of these actions I take. Things do seem much easier for me when decissions are made for me.

The new doctor s solution was to put me on Seroquel, an antipsychotic. Part of me feels willing to try and hopeful that this might be the long sought-after solution to everything, but I am also terrified of meds now after what happened with the last two. It feels like "well, gator wrestling didn t work. let s try shark jumping instead." just reading the list of possible side effect of seroquel makes me scared.

Why don t I halucinate then if I have psychosis? The doctor feels strongly that it is psychosis, but I don t experience halucinations. I also do know that I have OCD because as a kid I would ritualistically trace cracks in the ground and felt annoyed if I couldn t.

I told my doctor I didn t want to try another medication unless he felt damn sure that it would work when all the other backfired majorly. He still felt confident that I should go through with it. I m still recovering my sanity from the last medication I tried, so I m not eager to comply.

The big question ow is this: am I finnally getting new answers that I have been seeking all along, or am I only finding new questions and getting more lost?
Is there anyone out there in this lonely world who has experienced anything related to this and can give me some dirrection?
Can neurofeedback help with psychosis as well?

I greatly appreciate any experience you can empart
Answer :
I have worked in mental health medical records since 1987. I have seen psychiatrists change a diagnosis at the drop of a hat Sometimes diagnoses are changed and the medication stays the same. I have heard psychiatrists admit that mental illness diagnoses are very subjective.

I only have a bachelor s degree and I have had psychiatrists change a diagnosis when I let them know the insurance won t bill. Once I told a doctor the program wouldn t reimburse for OCD and he changed the patients diagnosis to Disorgranized Schizophrenia, just like that. I once asked a doctor why she put "Major Depression" as a patient s diagnosis, but in another part of the record it indicated the same patient had "Bipolar Disorder." When I asked her which was the correct diagnosis, she told me "it doesn t make any difference."


My impression is that the diagnosis is really only for purposes of billing the insurance company. Whether it s OCD, psychosis or whatever isn t really all that important. What really matters is if the treatment helps or not.

Your question details are very long and I don t have the patience to read the entire thing. But when you say some medication "didn t help"; how long did you take it? Did you take it as prescribed by your doctor? No medication is going to help if you don t give it a chance. Generally, you would need to take it for at least a month to be able to tell if it s really helping.

I don t think there is really any point in dwelling on "do I have this, or do I have that." I don t mean to be crass, but how do you know for certain you aren t just looking for attention?

I have been diagnosed with Major Depression, Dysthymic Disorder, and Panic Attacks. Sometimes I have symptoms that seem like Bipolar Disorder or OCD. When I was very young, I had symptoms that seemed to be a lot like ADHD or mild Autism.

I asked my doctor one time if I might have ADHD, and she said even if I did, she would give me the same medication anyway because it appeared to be working pretty well.
Source(s):
Worked in mental health since 1987, treated for depression and anxiety since 1983.