Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients, Families, and Providers If knowing one s enemy is key to surviving a prolonged
Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients ...
If knowing one's enemy is key to surviving a prolonged encounter, then Surviving Manic Depression should prove essential reading to those who suffer from this brain disease's horrific highs and lows. Having immersed themselves in the topic, E. Fuller Torrey, M.D., and Michael B. Knable, D.O., offer a comprehensive resource for those afflicted with-or responsible for treating-manic depression. Unfortunately, a surprisingly small amount of data exists regarding its prevalence, and existing studies show conflicting results.
Torrey and Knable's emphasis on dissecting all that is known about the disease clearly indicates that "survival" entails neither escape nor eradication; rather, it requires a lifelong pledge to undertake an effective course of treatment. The first step: learning every suspected cause, symptom, risk factor, and treatment strategy. Sprinkled among statistic-laden paragraphs, touches of empathy arrive via articulate quotations from sufferers including Patty Duke and Kay Jamison. But the crux of Torrey and Knable's work is its compilation of all the informative bits and pieces readers need to build an effective action plan. Most helpful are the chapters that address special problems (including alcohol and drug abuse, violent behavior, medication noncompliance, and the seduction of mania); and their no-holds-barred reviews of books, selected Web sites, and videotapes. -Liane ThomasSurviving Manic Depression is the most comprehensive, up-to-date book on the disorder that affects more than two million people in the United States alone. Based on the latest research, it provides detailed coverage of every aspect of the disorder.All aspects of the disease are addressed: symptoms, with many direct descriptions from patients themselves, risk factors, onset and cause, medications (including drugs still in the testing stage), causes, psychotherapy, and rehabilitation and how the disease affects children and adolescents. Here too are discussions of special problems related to manic-depressive disorder, including alcohol and drug abuse, violent behavior, medication noncompliance, suicide, sex, AIDS, and confidentiality. Surviving Manic Depression also includes special features such as a listing of selected websites, videotapes, and other resources.
Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients ...
Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients ...
Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients ...
Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/psychotic-disorders/surviving-manic-depression-a-manual-on-bipolar-disorder-for-patients-families-and-providers
Related video about Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients, Families, and Providers
January 24-Most Depressed Day of the Year Therese Borchard explains WHY
January 24-Most Depressed Day of the Year Therese Borchard explains WHY Author Popular Beliefnet Blogger Therese Borchard Explains Why Jan 24 is the Most Depressed Day of the Year and What We Can Do About It For Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients, Families, and Providers
Commonly question about Surviving Manic Depression: A Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients, Families, and Providers
Question :
Can you give me some feedback on this memoir I wrote?
I wrote a memoir a couple of years ago. It s very unedited and raw. I think it needs to be cleaned up a bit and things need to be omitted and added. I ve written a lot of things from then until now that relate to my memoir and now I want to kind of take the memoir in a different direction (more of a self-help positive book). My original direction was to let people in on the true dark side of bipolar and really delve into what a person living with bipolar experiences on a day to day experience with my many great examples that I provide. I didn t really have any direction with the memoir. It seemed like a bunch of ramblings. I tried submitting my memoir book to several agents and I got a couple of bites, but no follow throughs. I know it s tough to break into the writing world, but I just want my story to be heard. I m not looking to make big bucks or anything like that. I just want to be heard and hopefully help some people out along the way. I ve read several other bipolar and mental illness memoirs and I think they are in a different category than mine. My memoir is unlike anything I ve ever read. I had my ex-girlfriend and my wife read it and edit some of it, and after reading it, they really had a different outlook on bipolar. I think they enjoyed the read, and it got them emotional and mad at me at times when they read certain parts. I have an addiction to writing and being creative. Anyway, here is my prologue. Let me know what you think. I might put up more of the memoir in the future.
Psychology intrigued me from the start. Ever since I had my first psychology class in high school, I was fascinated by the subject and amazed at how mental illnesses could really affect someone. I never thought in a million years that that would soon be me.
This book is a grotesque view at the inside world of my struggle to accept, and cope with mania. I will reveal all of my darkest secrets and emotions. You will get an inside look at the perpetuating mind of a manic. You will see first hand how I make myself suffer because suffering is the only way I know how to live and to survive. I have no other choice, or rather, thats what my mind leads me to believe. I will take you into a journey of pain, anguish, and mental instability.
Many schizophrenic, bipolar, or mentally unstable people get the feeling that they are above everybody else when they get into a euphoric state of mind. They may see things that arent of this world. They might look like theyre on drugs. They may translate these sightings or feelings as having to do with religion in most cases. Whatever, or however, these things come about is very strange to the natural eye. Some people are disturbed by these people, and observe them as being demented in nature. Mania or depression is not a pretty sight to see or to deal with either. Yet I think that my disorder isnt even considered the worst when compared to all of the other disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of mental disorders (DSM). If anything, bipolar disorder is put on a pedestal. I seem to think its easy to live with, yet I still cant get my **** together, so it must technically not be as easy as I think it is. It takes a long time to get accustomed to, and to work around it. I literally have to do things differently, and take meds, and go to therapy because I cant live a normal life. Im screaming inside. I cant help but hate my disorder. Its a part of me, yet it has too much control over me.
I like to think that everybody has something special to give to the world whether it includes innovative ideas or inventions, or even just a caring heart. Even though no one will ever completely understand these psychotic people and symptoms because they are very complicated, and they are different for almost every person, many people suffering from disorders are still able to do some amazing things. This can include beautiful artwork, music, writing; etc.
When referring to the treatment of bipolar, some doctors try to say that they have the answers, but in actuality, they dont. Our general society has no clue as to how severe these symptoms can be and how many people actually suffer from these symptoms. Id like to help people in any way I can because theres almost always a way to subdue psychotic symptoms. You must know how to approach them in order to help mend the problem. A lot of doctors think that by prescribing you copious amounts of pills, your disorder or your problem will go away. Most people will continue taking their prescribed medications regardless of the serious side effects due to their constant fear of relapse. In my opinion, there havent been enough studies on some of these medications to bring them out to the public. (missing a couple paragraphs because not enough room) By the way, at one point in one of my manic episodes, I thought I was God; literally, God resurrected. As crazy
Answer :
well is not complete but it is great ... i m writer too and i must admit that your memoir is great ... and those who don t want to promote it don t know what they are throwing away ... if you keep it that way one day you might be as good as Dostoevsky