by inju Millions of people suffer from a depressive illness. They thought that depression is just a normal occurrence in their lives, which will go
Proven Techniques to Conquer Stress, Anxiety and Depression

by inju
Millions of people suffer from a depressive illness. They thought that depression is just a normal occurrence in their lives, which will go away after a short while. They just haven't realized how serious depression can be.
Did you know that words related to depression have been searched over 993,000 times on the Internet for May 2005 alone? Much attention has been centered to this international health problem as the rigorous challenges of modern times continue to devastate those who cannot cope with it. Extreme depression can ultimately lead to suicide.
No one is safe from being affected by depression because it affects everyone. It doesn't matter whether you're a male or female, rich or poor, educated or uneducated. Once a person starts becoming depressed, he or she usually behaves in a manner that intensifies the illness.
HOW DOES DEPRESSION AFFECT THE INDIVIDUAL'S BEHAVIOR? Depressed people have some or more of the following characteristics:
o They lose interest on their love life, career, friends, and family.
o They experience loneliness, hopelessness, gloom, and indifference to their surroundings. It is a feeling of extreme despair.
o They seek to escape from problems and even from life itself. Thoughts of leaving home, running away or avoidance of others is common. They feel life is hopeless and worthless. Suicidal thoughts are lurking in their minds.
o There is a tendency to escape from the company of others because of an unexplained fear of being rejected. Their withdrawal consequently brings on some rejection by other people. They cancel scheduled activities, become uninterested to return phone calls, and seek ways to avoid talking with or seeing others.
o They are overly sensitive to what others say and do. They may misinterpret actions and suggestions in a negative way and become irritable because of those mistaken assumptions. They complain and cry a lot.
o They have a general loss of self-esteem. They feel more and more negative about life's events, and they even question their own personal worth. Their self-confidence level is extremely low.
o They experience negative changes in physical activities-appetite, sleeping and sex. Some lose interest in sexual activities. Some lose interest in food while others gouge themselves with all the stuffs they can eat. Some sleep constantly while others cannot get to sleep easily, or they wake up in the middle of the night and cannot go back to sleep again.
o There is usually an underlying feeling of guilt. They often feel overly responsible for other people's feelings.
o Depression often makes the depressed dependent upon other people. This further aggravates a feeling of helplessness, which makes them more upset.
o They have difficulty expressing and handling their feelings. Anger is especially difficult for them to control. Because of a sense of worthlessness and lack of knowledge in dealing with their situation, they get more enraged in themselves. This can be directed outward at others.
Above ninety-five percent of even the most depressed individuals can be totally cured if the condition is identified at the early stages. It is essential to know and take action when the early warning signs of depression are manifesting.
Dealing with depression requires first and foremost an understanding that it is a common and treatable illness. Its symptoms include the following:
MAJOR SYMPTOMS OF DEPRESSION
o Miserable frame of mind over a period of time, sometimes in a number of weeks
o Expresses grief in activities and life in general, and fails to feel satisfaction
o Disheartened thinking - negative approach about oneself, the present and the future
o Difficulty in focusing and remembering
o Under the dilemma in making decisions - often even the more simple ones
o Feelings of unimportance and desperation
o Anxiety - a sense of being afraid - that something "dreadful" is going to happen
o Phobias or doubts about specific situations
o Loss of appetite and weight loss or, alternatively, increased appetite and weight gain
o Disrupted sleeping patterns - not much sleep or wanting to sleep all the time
o Feeling weary and lacking in energy and inspiration
o Loss of interest in sex
o Physical symptoms - aches and pains, gastrointestinal upsets, headaches
o Incapacity to do the usual everyday activities
o Thoughts of suicide
Various people do not try to find treatment in the early stage of depression as they started to observe such symptoms and thought that it will just pass away in a period of time, not noticing how severe the health problem can be.
UNOFFICIAL SYMPTOMS
People with depressive illness are:
Proven Techniques to Conquer Stress, Anxiety and Depression
Dan's Top 10 Stress and Anxiety Book Picks - Lawyers With Depression
depression/anxiety meds would you recommend? - Clinical depression ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/how-to-manage-and-conquer-depression
Related video about How to Manage and Conquer Depression
Natural Anxiety Depression Stress Relief Stress Management
Natural Anxiety Depression Stress Relief Stress Management xxsurl-com Natural Anxiety Depression Stress Relief Stress Management Find natural stress relief quickly Stress management techniques How to Manage and Conquer Depression
Commonly question about How to Manage and Conquer Depression
Question :
How to conquer negative thourghts?
A few years ago i started worrying lots about things in life because my partner was expecting our 1st child n there was more presures on my shoulders.i got depression but managed to get better with support but since then any stressfull situation that come along set me back on that place n all can think about is negative things.i use to b such a happy n worry free person n want to b that person again.any tips on retraining ur brain wud b appreciated!
Answer :
I understand what your going through. Destroying negative thoughts can be difficult, but you are able to be free of anxiety. Maybe you can walk through nature. Look at the moon, the stars, the trees. Watch the clouds move, and picture a world where serenity would exist always.

Think about your purpose in life, and know that you are not here on accident. Perhaps you could pray, and focus on the good that others have done for you and the blessings that you have been given.
Question :
Please help me deal with depression?
Ok this is my online story and I need to get rid of Depression I have no drive to write and I am an authoress on Fanfiction.net:

Ok so I start out on FF.net, writing a whole bunch of Naruto stories... I m not very public, but I manage. Then one day, I am searching for Akatsuki fan fics, when I come across a story by a writer known at that time by Jingas Meitel. I thought it was a boy, just reading ALL of her amazingly funny stories! I kind of e-stalk her to her forum, and try to get myself acquainted with her.

Things went well at first, but then I started to piss off some of her friends, I don t know how I managed to do that. But a WHILE after that, then things went back to normal and I became friends with the author, Jen and her friend Lauren. Anyway I thought things were ultimately cool between us, so I used some of her comedy idea s in my own stories. It wasn t as cool as I had thought. For revenge, they created one of my worst nightmares: Hayley. She was my biggest fan and also a girl who couldn t spell right at all. I suspected Jen form the start, but that thought quickly diminished.

Hayley in turn, stole MY idea s, like Mr. Lemons, and used them for utter crap fics. (Oh god How I despised her.) Only after... a few months did I learn that it was only Jen, Lauren, and another girl named Emily. That was the first blow.

I was devastated, almost crying my eyes out, thats when the Depression started entering my life. I found it harder and harder to keep my muse, and just calling it laziness. It wasn t. I started to lose my drive. I eventually forgave them, but it happened again, they Internet Trolled me. Depression really started dragging me down then. But then, a few apologies and Trolls later, they did it again, this time more recent. Depression had finally clouded my mind. I was so down, I started to think about what my friends and family would do if I killed myself.

I met some new friends, like Karly, Kelly, Mimi, Judaidara, and Mican. They helped me a bit, and suddenly the depression wasn t as great. I already had a friend who piled it up more and more though, Stephanie. I loved her, and I still think I do, but she used my love and lied to me. One day, I said to her, I have an idea. Lets go back to the way we were before the depression and trolling crap ruined it. She didn t agree, and only babbled on and on about how her water has Female hormones in it. It DOESN T.

Anyway... I left out a lot, I don t remember much except what I told you, and the rest is a bit private. But I need help to conquer my depression. I don t have a regular doctor,and I haven t told a soul about all this in real life. Not RL friends, not family. Please give me some tips on how to get over it, or point me to a free online Shrink?
Answer :
Depression is normal; it is one of the 6-8 basic emotions you are born with. When one gets criticized or scolded or used they get an immediate "down" feeling and this is depression. It is there for a purpose. The purpose being that what ever you are experiencing or doing is bad for you and you should either quit it or stop doing it in the way you have been doing it. In other words change course.

Depression is cyclic if normal and when one continues dwelling on the things that cause the depression in negative (self pitying) way then they can persist and even become the norm in which case you may have clinical depression. The cure for it is not meds but stopping negative thinking and think positive and/or forgive.

By the way I am not a doctor and if depression persists then see a doctor.
Source(s):
A person who has been suicidally depressed and recovered by learning to think positively.
Question :
How do you conquer low self esteem?
Sigh.
I m 15 years old.
I ve had depression for a few months, managed to get out of it a little.
I have an awesome mum.
I used to be so cheerful and bubbly and confident.
But i have low self esteem now, and i get jealous easily.

Please drop your advice here, thanks :(
Answer :
no big deal
many people suffer it, and many people suffer it for years
you re still young so it much better to get recover
here is some good material http://www.self-esteemnow.com/index.htm?