Phoenix, AZ (PRWEB) August 04, 2012 The leading Arizona pain center with multiple clinics in the Phoenix area, Arizona Pain Specialists, is now offering
Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Effective Ganglion Impar ...

Phoenix, AZ (PRWEB) August 04, 2012
The leading Arizona pain center with multiple clinics in the Phoenix area, Arizona Pain Specialists, is now offering ganglion impar block injections for chronic pelvic and coccyx pain. The injections by the Board Certified pain doctors in Arizona are excellent for treating coccydynia, also known as tailbone pain.
Additionally, the ganglion impar block works well for perineal pain due to various conditions such as cancer and postherpetic origin. Treatment can be started at (602) 507-6550.
The ganglion impar is a is a collection of nerve cells just in front of the tailbone area, and receives pain sensations from throughout the perineum and pelvis.The procedure is able to "block" conduction of the pain and often able to provide profound pain relief for tailbone pain and conditions affecting the rectum, vagina, and other perineal areas.
The procedure is outpatient, low risk and takes approximately 30 minutes. Pain relief is usually instant, and if the initial injection helps, repeat injections will typically achieve the same beneficial result.
Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Effective Ganglion Impar ...
Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Effective Ganglion Impar ...
Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Serves East Phoenix With Over A Dozen ...
Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Same Day Appointments For ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/leading-arizona-pain-center-now-offering-effective-ganglion-impar-block-for-chronic-coccyx-and-pelvic-pain
Related video about Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Effective Ganglion Impar Block for Chronic Coccyx and Pelvic Pain
Spinal Cord Stimulator Implants Help Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy 602 507-6550
Spinal Cord Stimulator Implants Help Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy 602 507-6550 scs spinal cord stimulation arizona pain clinic arizona pain center pain management az pain Leading Arizona Pain Center Now Offering Effective Ganglion Impar Block for Chronic Coccyx and Pelvic Pain