by marsmet53 Stress management for women is extremely beneficial for maintaining a well-balanced life. Most women suffer from anxiety and depression
Fortunately, plenty of anxiety management books are being published ...

by marsmet53
Stress management for women is extremely beneficial for maintaining a well-balanced life. Most women suffer from anxiety and depression due to various factors such as excess work pressure, family problems or financial conditions. In order to relieve tension, one should religiously follow relaxation techniques.
The effect of fast paced life, hectic work timings and high competition levels constantly build up the anxiety level among most women. Stress management is the best way to shed those worries from our lives. Good relaxation techniques can rejuvenate your mind, body and soul. Some women also suffer from GAD (Generalized Anxiety Disorder). We can see the permanence of nervousness in this disorder. According to many surveys, women undergo more anxiety than men. They are more sensitive emotionally hence they easily come under the trap of depression. In order to get rid of tension, it is always advisable to learn relaxation techniques.
Top 3 Techniques To Manage Stress And Anxiety Effectively
Meditation: It is the most effective stress management procedure for discarding nervousness. Meditating daily can revitalize your body, mind and spirit. It manages your stress and nervousness effectively. This relaxation technique offers you bliss. It makes you feel content. You can also try many Yoga postures to eliminate anxiety.
Deep Breathing: If you are feeling stressed out, you should take long breaths. In order to relieve stress, one should hold their breath for five seconds before releasing it. This is the best way to get rid of nervousness instantly.
Cardio Workouts: Exercises such as running, swimming, brisk walking and hiking can eliminate anxiety easily. These workouts are considered to be the best stress management exercises. These relaxation techniques help our body to produce many anti- anxiety hormones that consequently makes us feel rejuvenated and satisfied. You should perform cardio workouts daily to discard your emotional stress.
... of Anxiety - Stress Management (Mood Disorders and Stress Management
Anxiety & Stress Management Toolkit - Winslow - The best resources ...
Stress Management Tips That Work
Home >> Self Hypnosis MP3's >> Anxiety - Stress Management
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/stress-management-for-women-top-3-techniques-to-manage-stress-and-anxiety-effectively
Related video about Stress Management For Women - Top 3 Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively
Stress Management For Women - Top 3 Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively
Stress Management For Women - Top 3 Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively Women Stress Management Link bit ly Stress management for women is extremely beneficial for Stress Management For Women - Top 3 Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively
Commonly question about Stress Management For Women - Top 3 Techniques to Manage Stress and Anxiety Effectively
Question :
Help with time management?
Right now, I am enrolled in all AP/IB classes that are giving me 3 hours of homework a day total. Before this, I was a straight a student but now Im a C student because there isn t enough time to take in the material considering I work after school sometimes till 11, I am in the FBLA club, I volunteer weekly at a no kill dog refuge, and I help a woman at least 2x a week around her house because she has rumatory and can t walk. Also I have weekly piano lessons, and I have to stay after school 1x a week for a extra class that Couldn t fit into the IB schedule. This is inevitably causing alot of stress planning out my weeks and on top of that getting that homework done. Im failing one class because instead of reading the chapters all I can do is scan through. I don t want my grades to get screwed up nor do I want to give up any of these things that I am doing. Any ideas for helping me manage my time better because right now Im only working at my actual job on weekends... but in a few weeks shes already warned all of us that if we were under 18 we were obligated to work 1 day a week till 11 and I can t do that and juggle this work. And ive talked to her and she says she can t make an exception for me and not everyone else. So any ideas to manage time????
Answer :
That s not time management, as you re not managing your time - you re making too much time for a vast array of extracurriculars.
Question :
Being paid less than my female counterparts.?
I work in a very busy department for a company. This department is primarily women (3 women and myself, a man). We all work very hard, each of us having our own stronger points which helps bolster each others weaker points. There is a hierarchy here. I was at the bottom (paid a measly 12k) but have worked my way up over 3 years.

We recently had to make a redundancy for one of the ladies as she was not coming to work due to relationship issues. Management decided we were able to incorporate her job into our already busy jobs. We did so, and I received a wage increase to reflect my extra workload and a hike up the corporate ladder.

Above me were my two other colleagues. At this point one of them has been off sick for two years with stress, but has retained her 36k wage somehow and company car. I cant climb much higher with her off ill.

My third colleague works extremely hard and is a real workhorse. She knows the job backwards, but the cost of this diligence and excellence is she has hardly any life at all outside of work. She is paid a reasonable wage, enough to buy a property, whereas I have been doing the same job for some months now on 14000 a year.

I have a degree and years of experience in a variety of roles, plus on top of doing the same role as my colleague I am also the IT support technician here (as I have lots of experience from other jobs in this, its been added to my job description) and I have been told I must handle all incoming formal complaints as the complaints liaison for customers, again due to my experience in the past with high profile cases and complaints handling.

My third colleague has now left as she has decided to have a baby with her partner. She says she will be back as her partner is on far less in terms of salary nd they cant afford it.

In the meantime, my managers have said they will pay me pro-rata the same rate as my pregnant colleague as I am doing her and other peoples job, plus I get an assistant (yet to arrive!). I know how much my colleague was paid as she told me. The amount they are paying me is only 1000 more than my current wage, far less than I thought I was due.

The business is having a hard time financially. With the current climate I d rather keep my job than demand more money but I am not happy.

Any advice?
Answer :
You need to post a resume online somewhere and start looking. Your job does not seem they are going to budge with the wage increase even if you tried. But at least you have a job and can take your time at really looking to see what is available.
Question :
A very difficult family situation...?
Okay, so I feel like my family is a hopeless slump. I am 27 years old, and right now I m still living at home because A) I m currently choosing to in order to help out my mother and B) My household would fall apart if I wasn t here. Plus, I ll go ahead and put C) Because it s "a little easier" for me and them, at the present time. Though I know that I need to live my own life, as well. I m working full-time, and in my younger years I started working on building my credit. So now I have 6 credit cards, about $80K in available credit (which no, I m not planning on spending up, just using for example) and I know as of recently that I have top-tier credit/scores for when I do want to get my own house at some point.

When I was 10 years old, our father put a gun to his head in the other bedroom one morning, and that is what we woke up to. My then-widowed mother tried to raise us alone. My grandmother (my mom s mom...I say that because I had 3 grandmothers at one point) saw this passing of my father (who never wanted her to come around the house here when he was alive) as a means to basically move in. She s lived here ever since then. For her, it was a place to go. My grandmother spent most of her life doing idiot jobs like "cutting grass" for $20 here and $15 there, barely making it in life. At one point she was sleeping in her car in a plaza parking lot (when my father was alive). So of course, she has lived with us now for about 17 years now.

I have an older brother who is 3.5 years older. When he was about 18 or 19, he moved out. He never really helped out with much around the house, never did a thing to help my mother. He s now 30, married and has a child. He s also an air traffic controller in constant training. He always wants "help" from my mother, who doesn t have anything, herself. I know he s making a lot more money...probably more than my entire household combined. But because my brother and his wife can t tone down their high life, yes, they can barely make it. I don t see him helping my mom in the future, either...when he s making the said $150K a year. He will still be "having a rough time" I m sure, and find some excuse not to help my mom.

My mom feels that she "can t multitask like me and my brother"...I know that she seems to struggled with OCD very heavily (I see her doing odd stuff around the house like re-checking stuff tons of times). Most of her life, she has averaged about $7 to $10 an hour in the jobs that she was worked. She has a 401K...there s probably not over $20K to $30K in it. She s heavily in debt with credit cards. She has years of work experience and is now in her early 50 s, but she s always been too "scared" to step up into a management position. She has been at her current job for about 8+ years now, and the lowest level manager makes about twice or more what she makes. She won t even try for it...she "doesn t want the stress."

I can t live at home forever, she knows that. I want to have my own wife and family someday, she knows that...but also is very nosey, scared of me having friends, socializing, etc. My family is a hermit and basically has no life. My grandmother is apparently a paranoid schizophrenic...mom said they diagnosed her with that a couple of decades ago. So granny makes up lies about the neighbors, twists stuff all around, thinks every woman is a "man dressed up like a woman"...you get the picture. She s batty.

I WANT to move up in my career positions. I ve been doing pretty good, considering...and I m always fighting to do better financially and to better my life in general. The time will come when I will have to move out. I know my mother looks to me as the "head" of the household...yet at the same time wants to treat me like a child, and I oftentimes have to stand up for myself as an adult and remind her that I can do what I wish. Especially since I pay part of the bills while I m here. She won t be able to make it without me, and my grandmother never held a job for very long...literally. My grandmother gets a social security check of about $500 a month. She pays my mom like $300 a month for rent, which is dirt cheap because she s broke. My grandmother is in her 70 s, she ll never work again, probably will never drive again...and will likely be hanging onto my mom until the day she dies. My mother would then be alone...and if I was married, obviously a wife doesn t want a "mother in law" moving in with her and her husband just because her husband s "mother had no one else."

I m unsure what to think/do in this situation. My family freaking sucks, and I already know that I ve missed out on a lot in life growing up because I was taking care of my mom and helping out with stuff that my sorr
Answer :
Speak to a professional counselor.
Know that you will have to stand up for yourself, not necessarily defend your decisions.
Make a plan that is financially sound for yourself, that you can afford.
Good luck.