by infomatique Treatment for Anorexia Nervosa is very essential. It is amazing to me that just 30 years ago the eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, w
seeking treatment for eating anxiety disorders in anorexia nervosa ...

by infomatique
Treatment for Anorexia Nervosa is very essential. It is amazing to me that just 30 years ago the eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, was rarely spoken about and there were not many places one could go in a way to get treatment for anorexia nervosa.
Just few years ago I was a high school graduate who had moved away from home after graduating and was home for one of my first visits. I had spoken to my best friend, whom I had not seen in a year or two, and I asked her to meet at our favorite restaurant that evening. I was so happy to be able to see her and so anxious to tell her about my life in New York.
I walked into the restaurant and looked over to our favorite table. There was already someone sitting there and I was disappointed but I kept looking for my friend. I walked through the entire restaurant and still could not find her. I went back toward our favorite table and as I got closer I could hardly believe my eyes; it was my best friend sitting at our table. I did not recognize her because she was so thin that I did not know it was her until I was next to the table.
It had been 2 years since we had graduated and I had not seen her in those two years but I was not prepared for what I saw. My friend was a beautiful brown eyed woman; about 5' 5" tall and never appeared to be in either category, heavy or thin. She was always healthy looking and did not even remotely resemble the person standing in front of me.
She could not have weighed more than 90 pounds and on her 5' 5" frame she looked like her skin was just being stretched over her bones and that if I hugged her too tightly, she would break like glass.
Anorexia Nervosa 1 Statistics Of Anorexia Nervosa 2009
Anorexia
anorexia nervosa symptoms signs causes diagnosis and treatment by get
Disorder Anorexia Nervosa How to control anxiety
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/eating-disorders/treatment-for-anorexia-nervosa-get-quick-help
Related video about Treatment For Anorexia Nervosa - Get Quick Help
2012 How to Get Thin and Skinny Fast
2012 How to Get Thin and Skinny Fast Why is the trend for females to be super-skinny Share your view or opinion about why we are supposed to be skinny - leave a comment or a video Treatment For Anorexia Nervosa - Get Quick Help
Commonly question about Treatment For Anorexia Nervosa - Get Quick Help
Question :
Do people who are recovering from Anorexia Nervosa really gain weight back quicker than normal dieters??
I know two people who are recovering, now both of them are just out of treatment. I have heard they get that pregnant belly look and keep it for a long while. Is this true? Also have heard if a normal person loses 50 pounds they could gain a 1/2 pound a week, an anorexic person is about 2 pounds a week. All of this true or is it a myth?
Answer :
Absolutely, the body s metabolism has become slower, so any food it gets, it clings to. It So an anerexic person will gain weight twice as fast. It might also be more painful. But it is worth it, because they will get healthy soon and become normal weight. The slowed metabolism doesn t last forever.
Source(s):
A recovered anerexic