Scottsdale, AZ (PRWEB) April 16, 2012 In perhaps the largest brain study to date 200 worldwide researchers from more than 100 institutions found that br
New study shows Transcendental Meditation improves brain functioning ...

Scottsdale, AZ (PRWEB) April 16, 2012
In perhaps the largest brain study to date 200 worldwide researchers from more than 100 institutions found that brain size and memory centers were larger in individuals with specific genetic markers. While the study did not refer to the impact of exercise on the brain, TrekDesk Treadmill Desks offers a reminder that walking 10,000 steps a day has been proven to increases brain size, mental capabilities and decrease the odds of mental degradation from disease.
Neurologists worldwide were intrigued by the study published in the journal, Nature Genetics, which matched and measured genetic similarities among 21,151 healthy subjects. The study uncovered individuals with a C rather than a T at specific genetic locations in their HMGA2 gene possessed larger brains and actually scored higher on standardized IQ tests. Commenting on the findings, lead researcher Paul Thompson, of the University of California stated, "This is a really exciting discovery, that a single letter change leads to a bigger brain. For the first time, we have watertight evidence of how these genes affect the brain."
The study also reported a consistent relationship between minor changes in the genetic code and diminished memory centers found in subjects with smaller brain sizes. Smaller brain size has been shown to be a biological marker for brain disorders such as depression, bipolar disorder, Alzheimers, dementia and schizophrenia. The researchers commented that drugs could be developed to target those gene variants and perhaps reduce the risk of those diseases.
TrekDesk Treadmill Desks CEO, Steve Bordley, believes an important part of the discussion is missing from this milestone research. We already know that consistent daily exercise increases brain size and reduces the risks of many debilitating mental diseases, arent we sending the wrong message that genetics predetermine our mental and physical potential? Studies have already shown that is not the case.
new study shows they can even change your brain
new study, published online January 26 in the journal BMC Biology ...
new study has found that excess of brain cells
Going mental: Study highlights brains flexibility, gives hope for ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/psychotic-disorders/new-study-shows-brain-size-tied-to-genes-trekdesk-treadmill-desks-may-offer-means-to-even-the-score
Related video about New Study Shows Brain Size Tied to Genes, TrekDesk Treadmill Desks May Offer Means to Even the Score
What Is Contemplative Neuroscience Ask Deepak
What Is Contemplative Neuroscience Ask Deepak of genes and the evolution of the brain It has recently been found that those that participate in contemplative practices increase the size of New Study Shows Brain Size Tied to Genes, TrekDesk Treadmill Desks May Offer Means to Even the Score
Commonly question about New Study Shows Brain Size Tied to Genes, TrekDesk Treadmill Desks May Offer Means to Even the Score
Question :
So are lesbians born lesbians?
There was a study done in Washington D.C on 128 straight men, they showed each of the men lesbian porn... every single man were fully aroused by it, they showed them straight porn every single man were fully aroused by it but then they showed them gay porn and only 2 men were and only a little aroused.

That explains why no offense a lot of gay men are a little bit girly and some are flamboyant (not all but some)

and then some studies show that you are gay because of your womb environment, then another article showed gay men and straight men have different size brains and thought very differently!

WHERE as there was another study in NEW YORK of heterosexual women, and they showed them videos/pictures or naked men and naked women, each one of them were far more aroused by the naked woman, EVERY. SINGLE. ONE. OF. THEM.

Male and female sexuality appears to be different, men are more visual that s for one. Although unlike women, men cant be seduced by the same sex, they are either born gay or they are not. Women, although straight, can engage in homosexual behavior through seduction.

Gay males and straight males are wired different I read, but there are loads of lesbians and I can t find any article that says they are born that way but soo many studies have said gay men are.

When ever I ask lesbians "why are you a lesbian?" they always reply"I find women more attractive"
Answer :
These studies sound very true, but what you re saying? Not so much.
I would get aroused by a naked woman, I also get aroused by just looking at myself naked. BUT I wouldn t engage in sexual activity with a woman, and I do not find them attractive in the way that I d want to do anything with them.
Every true gay or lesbian will want to be with the same sex (sexually, physically, emotionally, etc.). That is who they are truly attracted to and they don t choose it, they were just born that way. Just like how I was born as a person attracted to the opposite sex, they were born attracted to the same sex. My theory is a hormone imbalance: a male had more estrogen and a woman had more testosterone.
Question :
Why are people against Marijuana so uneducated about it?
Like, they still believe that it kills brain cells (despite it never being proven and the study claiming it being beyond flawed, and a study suggesting that it might actually stimulate the growth of new brain cells) or that it causes cancer (which there has never been a link found between marijuana smoking and any sort of cancer - however, it s been shown that weed smokers are less likely to get brain cancer, neck cancer, prostate cancer, etc - and it s been shown to shrink tumour size, starve off cancerous cells while leaving healthy onces alone).

Why do people get arrogant attitudes about being "above" or "better" than someone because they don t smoke weed, despite the fact that they go binge drinking every other weekend, which alcohol had been PROVEN to be MUCH MORE HARMFUL than weed?

Why do they claim that it s easy to OD on marijuana, when there has never been one reported case in all of history of this happening?

Why do they think legalization will cause more minors to use it, despite the fact that statistics show that after countries and all US states have legalized medical marijuana have actually seen an overall decrease in teen usage?

Why do they think that legalization would support drug dealers, when they ll be driven out of business since people would rather buy legally?
Answer :
People are ignorant and brain washed by the government. That s why people still support war and the laws against a harmless plant. I believe our generation will fix a lot of these problem we just need to vote and have our opinions heard.
Question :
The Octopus, Mans new best friend?
ON AN UNSEASONABLY WARM day in the middle of March, I traveled from New Hampshire to the moist, dim sanctuary of the New England Aquarium, hoping to touch an alternate reality. I came to meet Athena, the aquariums forty-pound, five-foot-long, two-and-a-half-year-old giant Pacific octopus.

For me, it was a momentous occasion. I have always loved octopuses. No sci-fi alien is so startlingly strange. Here is someone who, even if she grows to one hundred pounds and stretches more than eight feet long, could still squeeze her boneless body through an opening the size of an orange; an animal whose eight arms are covered with thousands of suckers that taste as well as feel; a mollusk with a beak like a parrot and venom like a snake and a tongue covered with teeth; a creature who can shape-shift, change color, and squirt ink. But most intriguing of all, recent research indicates that octopuses are remarkably intelligent.

Many times I have stood mesmerized by an aquarium tank, wondering, as I stared into the horizontal pupils of an octopuss large, prominent eyes, if she was staring back at meand if so, what was she thinking?

Not long ago, a question like this would have seemed foolish, if not crazy. How can an octopus know anything, much less form an opinion? Octopuses are, after all, only invertebratesthey dont even belong with the insects, some of whom, like dragonflies and dung beetles, at least seem to show some smarts. Octopuses are classified within the invertebrates in the mollusk family, and many mollusks, like clams, have no brain.

Only recently have scientists accorded chimpanzees, so closely related to humans we can share blood transfusions, the dignity of having a mind. But now, increasingly, researchers who study octopuses are convinced that these boneless, alien animalscreatures whose ancestors diverged from the lineage that would lead to ours roughly 500 to 700 million years agohave developed intelligence, emotions, and individual personalities. Their findings are challenging our understanding of consciousness itself.

I had always longed to meet an octopus. Now was my chance: senior aquarist Scott Dowd arranged an introduction. In a back room, he would open the top of Athenas tank. If she consented, I could touch her. The heavy lid covering her tank separated our two worlds. One world was mine and yours, the reality of air and land, where we lumber through life governed by a backbone and constrained by jointed limbs and gravity. The other world was hers, the reality of a nearly gelatinous being breathing water and moving weightlessly through it. We think of our world as the real one, but Athenas is realer still: after all, most of the world is ocean, and most animals live there. Regardless of whether they live on land or water, more than 95 percent of all animals are invertebrates, like Athena.

The moment the lid was off, we reached for each other. She had already oozed from the far corner of her lair, where she had been hiding, to the top of the tank to investigate her visitor. Her eight arms boiled up, twisting, slippery, to meet mine. I plunged both my arms elbow deep into the fifty-seven-degree water. Athenas melon-sized head bobbed to the surface. Her left eye (octopuses have one dominant eye like humans have a dominant hand) swiveled in its socket to meet mine. Shes looking at you, Dowd said.

As we gazed into each others eyes, Athena encircled my arms with hers, latching on with first dozens, then hundreds of her sensitive, dexterous suckers. Each arm has more than two hundred of them. The famous naturalist and explorer William Beebe found the touch of the octopus repulsive. I have always a struggle before I can make my hands do their duty and seize a tentacle, he confessed. But to me, Athenas suckers felt like an aliens kissat once a probe and a caress. Although an octopus can taste with all of its skin, in the suckers both taste and touch are exquisitely developed. Athena was tasting me and feeling me at once, knowing my skin, and possibly the blood and bone beneath, in a way I could never fathom.

When I stroked her soft head with my fingertips, she changed color beneath my touch, her ruby-flecked skin going white and smooth. This, I learned, is a sign of a relaxed octopus. An agitated giant Pacific octopus turns red, its skin gets pimply, and it erects two papillae over the eyes, which some divers say look like horns. One name for the species is devil fish. With sharp, parrotlike beaks, octopuses can bite, and most have neurotoxic, flesh-dissolving venom. The pressure from an octopuss suckers can tear flesh (one scientist calculated that to break the hold of the suckers of the much smaller common octopus would require a quarter ton of force). One volunteer who interacted with an octopus left the aquarium with arms covered in red hickeys.

Why are they so smart?
Answer :
Lots of animals are "smart." We tend to define intelligence using our own yard stick. In other words, animals seem "smart" when they do things that appear similar to the way we would do them. They are things that we understand and can measure. But animals do not perceive the world in the same way that we do. And what is "smart" to us could get them killed in their own environments. There is a school of evolutionary thought that argues that brains evolve to use the tools that organisms have. In other words, birds learn to fly because they have wings. If humans had the capacity to sense the world with every inch our skin, like octopi, we would perceive it differently. Our brains would learn to take advantage of that fact and possibly we would be smarter. In any case, we would appear smarter to an octopus. It s all relative. But a much simpler answer is that octopi are nature s little snacks in their native environment and they need to have a lot of different strategies to evade their many predators. Their diet is varied, too, so they need different strategies to hunt different animals. They are smart because they have to be.
Source(s):
Too many to list.