Horse Shoe, NC (PRWEB) February 15, 2011 This April, three prominent addiction treatment programs Four Circles Recovery Center, Sober Living by the Sea
Anxiety & Addiction Treatment - Anxiety & Chemical Dependency Recovery ...
Horse Shoe, NC (PRWEB) February 15, 2011
This April, three prominent addiction treatment programs Four Circles Recovery Center, Sober Living by the Sea and SunHawk Adolescent Recovery Center and two highly regarded clinical professionals Susan Berlin, LICSW, CASAC and Don Sloane, MSOD, CPCC will co-host an event featuring Terence Gorski, an internationally acclaimed addiction treatment professional and pioneer in the area of relapse prevention.
Gorski is the creator of the GORSKI-CENAPS model, a comprehensive system for diagnosing and treating addiction and related disorders. Recognized by the National Institute on Drug Abuse among the top three best known and most respected treatment approaches in the United States, the GORSKI-CENAPS model has been used for more than 25 years in a variety of addiction treatment settings.
On April 8, 2011, Gorski will lead a daylong CEU workshop titled Denial Management Counseling: The Key to Successful Engagement. Attendees will learn about the patterns of denial as well as strategies to interrupt denial and prepare clients to confront their addiction.
Terry is one of the giants in our field, said Jack Kline, MS, LPC, LCAS, CCS, the executive director at Four Circles Recovery Center. He has a tremendous amount of wisdom to share, and we are fortunate to work alongside him in an effort to improve the practices of clinicians and the lives of people suffering from addiction.
Working in conjunction with Four Circles Recovery Center, Sober Living by the Sea and SunHawk Adolescent Recovery Center to co-host this event are professional interventionist Don Sloane and psychotherapist Susan Berlin.
For anyone faced with the denial pervasive among addicted clientele, Gorskis 12 patterns provide a framework to more effectively support recovery, said Sloane.
Susan Berlin added, I am so proud to be co-hosting Terence Gorski as our presenter. Terry is such a pioneer in the field of addiction treatment and a prominent speaker, and I look forward to bringing him to my Washington, D.C. community.
Located at the Bethesda Marriot in Bethesda, Maryland, just northwest of Washington, D.C., the workshop will be held from 8:30 a.m.4:30 p.m. on April 8. Attendees can earn six continuing education credits. For more information or to register for the workshop, call Susan Berlin at (202) 333-1787.
Residential Treatment Program
Conference Co-Hosts
Recovery Ways Outpatient Program provides treatment which will ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/personality-disorders/addiction-treatment-programs-to-co-host-addiction-workshop-for-clinical-professionals
Related video about Addiction Treatment Programs to Co-Host Addiction Workshop for Clinical Professionals
Interventionist Jeff Jay Explains Intervention against Addiction
Interventionist Jeff Jay Explains Intervention against Addiction World renowned Interventionist and Author Jeff Jay was one of the keynote speakers along with his wife Debra Jay at a joint program of Brighton Addiction Treatment Programs to Co-Host Addiction Workshop for Clinical Professionals