by tfloersch Given that one of the most important aspects of treating diseases and disorders is gaining access to accurate and specific information
Treating Anxiety Disorders - Different Types Of Anxiety

by tfloersch
Given that one of the most important aspects of treating diseases and disorders is gaining access to accurate and specific information about the condition, both physicians and patients should be aware of what they need to know about the condition. For anxiety disorders, this is also very true, as having the right knowledge about anxiety disorders can greatly help in the treatment of the disorder. However, gaining knowledge on anxiety disorders does not only involve knowing the different types of anxiety disorders and their symptoms. Physicians and patients should be aware of the pathology of the disorder, which includes knowing the different causes of anxiety disorders. However, knowledge on the pathology of anxiety disorders does not only help in determining the type of treatment to be used. It can also help in preventing situations that trigger the problem.
Causes of Anxiety Disorders
There are a number of reasons that have been identified or suspected to cause anxiety disorders. One of these is the theory that anxiety disorders are caused by chemical imbalances. Another theory is that the genetic disposition of a person determines the likelihood that a person would develop an anxiety disorder when given the right trigger. On the other hand, there are also theories that say that anxiety disorders are learned behaviors and that unresolved issues from a person's past cause anxiety disorders. In addition to these, there is also a theory that says that not being able to properly manage symptoms of anxiety can cause the condition to become an anxiety disorder.
Anxiety Disorders
role in the pathology of mood and anxiety disorders
Mood & Anxiety Disorders Unit
Obsessing About Anxiety Disorders EGMN: Notes from the Road
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/anxiety-disorders-and-pathology
Related video about Anxiety Disorders and Pathology
Exposure vs Therapy Physiology of Anxiety Disorders
Exposure vs Therapy Physiology of Anxiety Disorders This video is like a little lecture on anxiety disorder therapies and the underlying theory by me who has first-hand experience with the topic Anxiety Disorders and Pathology
Commonly question about Anxiety Disorders and Pathology
Question :
Anxiety disorder iethiology and pathology?
Answer :
The cause (eitiology) of anxiety disorder are many but may essentially because the nervous system has become habituated to being in a state of emotional stress or trauma. The fight/flight reaction doesn t shut off. A person then may experience numerous symptoms than mimic a range of diseases (GI upset, shortness of breath and chronic cough, heart palpitations, muscular pain, headache syndromes, and psychiatric symptoms such as disassociation a sense of not being connected to oneself or one s surroundings, phobias, compulsions, panic, and intrusive thoughts. Depression also often accompanies anxiety disorder). It is now often treat with some sort of neuropsychiatric medication and behavioral and cognitive therapy.
Question :
Is this really anxiety and panic? PLEASE HELP!!!?
I am a 23 year old male. I am a little bit overweight but live an active lifestyle and exercise regularly. Before all this happened I had no symptoms of any sort like what I am about to explain. About 4 months ago I was at work and had an attack of some sort after walking up a flight of stairs. I immediately thought I was having a heart attack. Couldn t breath, heart racing, felt like I was going to pass out. Got to the hospital and had another attack. Vitals were fine when I arrived. Blood pressure was extremely high but I do not suffer from high blood pressure. I had an EKG, chest x-ray, and blood work done. These tests all came back normal. I was sent home and told to follow up with my doctor the next day. I saw my primary Dr. and he immediately said it was a panic attack. He offered me Xanax but I refused. I returned to work the next day. I was there for about an hour and had another attack. I was sent home from work and saw my doctor the next day again this time he insisted I take the Xanax. At first I was having really bad anxiety because I thought there was something physically wrong with me. The Xanax helped but then I ran out. I was told to see a psychiatrist and a therapist. I have ultimately been diagnosed with Anxiety disorder. I have been seeing the therapist and psychiatrist regularly and have also had numerous physical tests done for cardiac pathology. I have had a stress test, echocardiogram, halter monitor, numerous EKG s, cholesterol blood work, thyroid blood work, and a sleep study. All of the tests came back normal. The panic attacks have started to become less intense and don t come as often but I still get them. I think because of the physical symptoms I get throughout the day is the only reason I get a panic attack. The main symptoms I get are extremely sharp pains in my head, headaches, dizziness, light headed, trouble breathing, chest pain, rib pain, racing heart, palpitations, skipped heart beats, feels like the world is moving, unstable, and weakness in my arms and legs. The reason I am asking if this is really anxiety is because I get all these symptoms out of no where. I could be feeling absolutely perfect and receive one of these symptoms. I can t help but still think this is something physically wrong with me. Please any insight on this will help. Is there anything else I should get checked out? I don t want to feel these symptoms anymore. I want to find out what is wrong!
Answer :
I have panic disorder and that sounds exactly right. :) I found huge benefit from Mindfulness Meditation. I also use a medication similar to Xanax, but less powerful.
Question :
Does anyone know about Social Anxiety?
I have a stepson whom is 20 years old. He dropped out of highschool at 16. Sat in the basemnt playing video games until last year. His father and I told him he has to go to school or work.

He says no medication helps him, he goes to speech pathology once a week, but in the 2 years of knowing him he seldom talks to me, unless he wants something.

I have helped him get a income of $200 per month. Picked up his girlfriends, drive him to school, take him to doctors. We sit at the dinner table he says nothing to anyone, no emotion on his face.

He also does not talk to my 2 boys, they are all interested in computer games, and when we were out the other nite his father and me. My boys internet stopped working. He is the only one in the house that knows how to fix this. He said I dont know what is wrong. Basically refusing to help them. My children have tried to get to know him, he just says they have nothing in common.

Is this social anxiety disorder or is it just plain being rude with no manners.

It is causing a big riff in his dad and my relationship.

We get along wonderfuly and love each other very much.

HELP
Answer :
Sounds more like depression.... he needs one-on-one therapy. @ 20 years old, does he have a job or pay rent? Sounds like he ll be living in your basement for a long time. Maybe it s time to stop "paying his way", and show him the door.

I have social anxiety and Paxil helps the best... very effective.
Source(s):
Life is hard, and schooling is a must.