by Topeka & Shawnee County Public Library While it may be hard to find someone who has not experienced some form of anxiety in their life, there are
Anxiety Disorders Basics

by Topeka Shawnee County Public Library
While it may be hard to find someone who has not experienced some form of anxiety in their life, there are those whose anxiety never fades which can make it impossible for suffers to lead a normal life. When the ability to participate in certain events or go to certain places is prevented by an unshakable fear of things that could possibly occur many find themselves becoming reclusive instead of enjoying the life they once led.
Suffers of anxiety disorders may think that their "disease" is something that is uncontrollable, but that could not be further from the truth. Those suffering from some form of anxiety disorder can take hold of their symptoms with the right form of treatment for anxiety disorders since it is a condition and not an illness that causes people to become physically, psychologically, emotionally, or spiritually fearful or distraught over any number of situations. When this happens a person's normal anxiety turns into a disorder because the mind and body can no longer respond to situations in a normal manner, but no matter how bad your symptoms are you can take hold of your anxiety with the right help and support in treating anxiety disorders.
Some may choose to turn to medication in order to assist in reducing their anxiety disorder symptoms, and while this may work for some, it should not be considered the only cure for healthy living. While some may claim otherwise, medication actually has a very low success rate for treating anxiety disorder symptoms which does not bode well for long term success in taking control of your anxiety symptoms. Anxiety disorders commonly occur for specific reasons and are commonly associated with an underlying reason. When you take control over the underlying cause, the disorder that is associated with the cause is gone for good.
When you mask the symptoms with the assistance of medication, you are not addressing the underlying reasons for the disorder which prevents you from achieving a successful treatment for anxiety disorders. Anxiety disorder suffers who choose medication commonly end up staying on the medication for the long term, resulting in a type of yo-yo effect of going on and off the drugs over and over again without resolving the issues once and for all. Until the underlying cause of the anxiety is addressed, the symptoms will remain preventing the sufferer from returning to the life they once loved.
Based on extensive research it has been found that the most effective treatment for anxiety disorders is the combination of the right form of self help instruction with the assistance of a qualified therapist who specializes in dealing with anxiety recovery. A coach, counsellor, therapist, or even a psychologist who has successfully beaten anxiety in their own life and have been free of medication for at least 3 years are all good choices when choosing the right therapist for assistance in treating anxiety disorders. Therapists who are currently on medication for treating their own anxiety have proven to not be good sources for anxiety help. Studies have shown that those who work with a therapist that has overcome their own anxiety disorder tend to be the best in assisting others in tackling their own unique form of this disorder. Those who are still using anti-anxiety meds may lead current suffers to wonder how helpful could this therapist be if they are unable to overcome their own anxiety disorder.
While this claim any bother some mental health professionals, our experience has shown that this claim commonly proves to be true. Many who have previously enlisted the help of one of these professionals for the treatment of anxiety disorders have found that their condition remained or in the worst case actually got worse even after treatment. Anxiety disorders can be cured but you need to have the right information as well as the right level of support to help your end your anxiety disorder once and for all.
Anxiety disorders can be classified in either one of two categories. Suffers are most commonly prone to either circumstantial anxiety or chronic anxiety, both of which can be cured if treated properly.
Circumstantial Anxiety:
Stress Disorder Symptoms and Treatment Mental disorders treatment ...
Part I- The Basics of Anxiety Disorders
anxiety basics anxiety types and disorders anxiety treatment anxiety ...
Anxiety Disorder Symptoms - Signs & Symptom of Generalized Anxiety ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/the-basics-of-treating-anxiety-disorders
Related video about The Basics of Treating Anxiety Disorders
PTSD Basics of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
PTSD Basics of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder The Rough Guide to PTSD Facts to help you understand and cope with post traumatic stress disorder From Kate White Treating Anxiety Blog on The Basics of Treating Anxiety Disorders
Commonly question about The Basics of Treating Anxiety Disorders
Question :
Does my father abuse us?
Hi...I ll try to type out my situation unbiased and as accurate as possible, sorry if it s a little long...

I decided to go out-of-state to college; I m 18 years old. I m independent...I have a job, I help around the house, and try to be as nice as possible...I know I m not perfect, but I know I m a decent kid. No drugs or alcohol or major trouble ever. I received a decent amount of scholarships and grants so price isn t a huge issue. however, my father has a HUGE problem with me leaving. I think it s because he feels abandoned, because he lives alone away from me and my sister.
He couldn t approach his concerns reasonably or calmly...instead he would send me and my mom emails about how much I m messing up my life, with threats to take her to court if she signs for my loans, he called me a stupid punk, a pig, told me to f*ck off, and today, topped it off with saying he doesn t love us anymore. This has been going on for months, and all my life he s been so mean to my mom, cursing at her and calling her names. I know he has ruined her life; she is so depressed.

Every time I would see him, it would turn into a huge fight with him yelling at me and I ll admit, me yelling back. I did not hold back anything; I told him that he is controlling and mean and full of himself and that he s turned me against him, that I want nothing to do with him.

But he claims this is "normal" for families. He swears that all dads insult their daughters and get into huge fights. He says my mom is an idiot and has forced me and my sister to turn against him, and that he has done nothing and that everyone attacks him. He calls her a stupid Puerto Rican, a stupid civil servant because she is a teacher, and says she can t support us and is a failure. I remember as a little girl, they would get into a huge arguments and he would throw food and call her names. My old therapist said this developed my eating disorder, anxiety, and depression that I ve dealt with for 6 years.

I know I m not the nicest person to him...i say what s on my mind because I just can t take it anymore. I tried to give him a chance by going on vacation with him this summer, but I just can t. He s so hard to deal with.

These are only the basics and it would take me years to type out everything...but does this sound like emotional abuse? He s only been physical when he punches walls and throws things, once he slapped my mother..only once though. Does anyone know what I can do...he blames me for everything and inside I believe that this is all my fault, he says I need help and that I treat him bad and don t love him. I love him, but I hate him as a person.

Thank you :(
Answer :
I personally think you expressed yourself as well as the situation you re in thoroughly. You should of course continue your education no matter what. It seems as if you re a bright girl and you have several great opportunities to go to a great college. However, the relationship you have with your father is a stressful one and perhaps it would be best to have a somewhat deep conversation with your mother (especially since he wants to bring legal matters into your school situation). I personally would hold off on a vacation with someone like your father, it only seems like a disaster waiting to happen. Try to continue calling him often, but keep it short. He definitely has caused years of abuse on your family. It s touching how much you care and the effort your struggling with, but there needs to be a point in your life where if he never changes or gets the help he needs for his anger you need to either walk away or just tough it out every time you two come in contact with each other. Overall just realize that you did your best to try and keep in touch and show that you care, but if it s never acknowledged or appreciated there s not much more you can do.