Bethesda, Maryland (PRWEB) February 22, 2012 The Greenspan Floortime Approach announces a new video course for parents of children with special needs, n
... FREE Assessment of Your Child The Greenspan Floortime Approach
Bethesda, Maryland (PRWEB) February 22, 2012
The Greenspan Floortime Approach announces a new video course for parents of children with special needs, now available for a special introductory offer online until May 13, 2012. Parents and professionals can view the course from the comfort of their own homes with access to course material 24-hours a day.
Parents can also download a free Guide on Childrens Learning Styles to evaluate what will help their children learn best. In addition, parents can try out an online developmental and sensory processing assessment for free before subscribing. Available on http://www.StanleyGreenspan.com
The new course, from lectures by renowned child psychiatrist Dr. Stanley I. Greenspan, helps parents understand their childs developmental delays and demonstrates how to do Floortime, where parents engage their child to expand his or her intellectual and emotional development. Results from two recent randomized, controlled studies show significant social and emotional gains in children whose parents used Floortime.
About Dr. Greenspan The Greenspan Floortime Approach
About Floortime The Greenspan Floortime Approach
Floortime - The Greenspan Floortime Approach
Floortime - The Greenspan Floortime Approach
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/the-greenspan-floortime-course-for-parents-of-children-with-autism-aspergers-adhd-ocd-anxiety-aggression-and-sensory-processing-problems-is-now-available-online
Related video about The Greenspan Floortime Course for Parents of Children with Autism, Aspergers, ADHD, OCD, Anxiety, Aggression, and Sensory Processing Problems is Now Available Online
Dr Gil Tippy Presents with Dr Anni Bergman Part 1 mov
Dr Gil Tippy Presents with Dr Anni Bergman Part 1 mov presenting a case from our two different perspectives my DIR Floortime perspective via Dr Stanley Greenspan and her Separation and The Greenspan Floortime Course for Parents of Children with Autism, Aspergers, ADHD, OCD, Anxiety, Aggression, and Sensory Processing Problems is Now Available Online