Am I Depressed Cybertron TechnologiesHave you been wondering if you are depressed? This free test can help you determine whether you may be experien
... depression treatment for anxiety how do i know whether am i depressed

Cybertron TechnologiesHave you been wondering if you are depressed? This free test can help you determine whether you may be experiencing the symptoms of depression. The test is self-administered. Answer each question and move to the next question. When you have completed all of the questions, you will be given an evaluation of your results.Note: Test results will not represent a professional diagnosis and this test is for educational purposes only.
Do I Have Depression - What is Depression and Am I Depressed
Am I depressed or am I sad?
Am I Depressed? - Healthmango
... am 15 years old, and I suffer from depression, bipolar and anxiety
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/am-i-depressed
Related video about Am I Depressed
HELP I AM ANXIOUS OR DEPRESSED from THE MEANING OF YOUR LIFE Secular Help
HELP I AM ANXIOUS OR DEPRESSED from THE MEANING OF YOUR LIFE Secular Help From the new book THE MEANING OF YOUR LIFE - Secular Help for the Puzzled Disappointed or Depressed Copyright by Marius Croeser amazon-com Am I Depressed
Commonly question about Am I Depressed
Question :
How do i know if i am depressed?
i am a 15 year old guy with no girl problems and a ton of friends. my mom and my friends have been saying i seem depressed. i have gone to 4 different high schools and i am in 10th grade now. the school i went to last year i liked and i want to go to again this year but my mom is making me to go to a different school. Can that cause depression?
Answer :
Yes it can.
There are symptoms of depression, though.
Can you lost them in your details?
I can answer your question with a better answer if you put things that makes you think you have depression.
Going to a different school can be tough. Not being able to be with the friends you met at the other school, and missing them and the school.
Your best bet is to just NOT worry about it, and go with the flow. Just let yourself open ti new options, and give your new school a chance.
Question :
Help please, am i depressed?
Hi, My name is Joe, im a girl and im 14. I just stepped into my first year of high school. But i think i might be depressed. Since the beginning of summer, ive been feeling severely lonely. Nothing has been going right for me lately. During the summer my best friend went to greece the whole summer so i really spent my summer at the beach with my mom, my 2 other sisters, and my older sisters boy friend, and girl friend. I felt so lonely and alone the whole summer, because i have a twin sister that i usually hang out with but she was with her friends so i had nobody my age. I felt so lonely i would cry when my sisters boy friend, and girl friend would leave for work and it would just be my sisters me and my mom. I got so attached to everybody that if they left i would cry. I now still feel lonely even though every day monday through friday i am surrounded by people. I know alot of people but they arent really my close friends but they are still my friends but i feel lonely. The only time i dont feel lonely is if im with my best friend or my sisters or my sisters boy friend and girl friend. I just feel like i am depressed all the time. Because one i feel lonely and two i feel like my parents like my sister more and that everybody loves my sister and im just the loser. I have a twin sister, she is smarter than me, skinnier than me, she is prettier than me, and has more friends than me. I feel like that i am just the twin who is a loser and dislexic and cant do anything right. My dad and mom belive in her goign into princeton collage and me going to some crap collage. My dad goes to every one of her lacross games but only went to 1 of my soccer games. i feel so down like i am just a screwed up wreck. Also my highschool is full of all preppy rich snobs, and im not one of those types of people and i feel like i just dont belong there. Like that isnt where i am suppost to be. they all intimidate me. I have friends but i just feel like crap lately and i cant stop eating. ive been eating alot and not exersising that much . i feel over weight and just not good. the only time i dont feel depressed is with my best friend zach. and i have been going to sleep early when i usually go to sleep so late. also i take like random 30 muinet naps. i just am not feeling my self . i always put myslef down and im never positive. am i depressed? sombody help me please!
Answer :
Well I know how you feel you should definitely go see someone.Ask your parents to take you to see a therapist or a counselor because you definitely need to be treated so you can feel better and you can be happy and be yourself again!! You are not alone in this!! I am going through the same thing as you.
Hopefully this helps!!
Question :
I am depressed real bad right now because of my skin condition, How can I feel better?
I am depressed as heck right because few months ago I started having eczema breakouts on my hands. This was weird because I didn t even know what eczema was and the doctor prescribed a medicine I am applying as much as I can and it s helping a lot.

But for past month or so I had small red bumps on my back and also my arms which were extremely itchy and I thought it was from Bed bugs or something. So I took an appointment and the doctor confirmed that it was infact actually Eczema breakouts.

Now the reason why set up an appointment was because there was some rash on my face and it also caused some discoloration. The doctor took at look at it said it s a Fungus and prescribed a pill for me to take twice a day for 3 days and told me that the discoloration won t go away for about few months..

Now I am freaking out. I just turned 30 few months ago and Never had any skin problems like this that happened all of a sudden..

Should I be worried. I know eczema can happen to anyone and has many causes for it. And also that the fungus on face can also happen to anyone at anytime ..

But still..I am freaking out..I come from an abusive house and I ran away 4 years ago for a better life so I don t have anyone to talk to pretty much..I can t talk to my mother because she s a manipulator ..
I don t know what to do. How should I take this easy and just relax and think about this for a moment..I had some goals written down on a paper that I wanted to finish today , But couldn t because of the thoughts in my mind ...I don t know how I can feel better. I notice that Once every week I go into the stress thoughts where my mind cannot function anymore. I feel like I am writing too much.. How can I feel better about my situation or condition?
Answer :
are you recently living with any animals? living in a damp house? changed your soap powder or shampoo? It could even be something new or not so new to your diet. eczema is a condition you have to treat 70% of the time by yourself, skin doctors can check you over, make sure your applying the correct creams properly, give you medicine and send you for skin and food tests. but all in all its you who has to do the most investigating. I recommend piriton for the itching or an antihistamine and aveeno lotion.