by Topeka & Shawnee County Public Library Eating disorders are described as a group of abnormal eating habits. These can either be in the form of an
treatment for anxiety disorder

by Topeka Shawnee County Public Library
Eating disorders are described as a group of abnormal eating habits. These can either be in the form of an excessive food intake, or a reduced food intake. There are certain disorders included in this term. These are described below:
1. BINGE EATING DISORDER:
It is described as having a binging type eating behavior. People affected by this disorder usually eat a large amount of food at a time and most of the times when they are depressed or bored.
2. BULIMIA NERVOSA:
It is characterized by repeated binge eating patterns followed by a compensatory action, like self-induced vomiting, an increased intake of laxatives or diuretics or an excessively increased exercise.
3. ANOREXIA NERVOSA:
It can be described as cutting off diet to an excessive amount, beyond the healthy levels in a fear of gaining excessive weight. This kind of eating pattern has many harmful side effects. These include cessation of menstruation, loss of healthy bone material, absent skin integrity, an increased risk of cardiac disease etc.
4. PURGING DISORDER:
It is described as a regular increased urge of controlling the weight or body shape.
5. RUMINATION:
This is a type of eating disorder characterized by a recurrent reflux of food after a meal, but it is painless. This food is either swallowed or thrown.
6. DIABULIMIA:
It is a disorder found in diabetics as is manifested by its name. It is characterized by an intentional manipulation of the insulin doses by the diabetics in an attempt to control weight.
7. EATING DISORDERS NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFIED (EDNOS):
This is a vast term. It includes women suffering from anorexia nervosa but still not missing their menstrual period.
It also includes persons having anorexic thoughts or eating patterns but still having their weight under healthy limits.
read about anxiety (generalized anxiety disorder, gad) causes ...
Social Anxiety Disorder What Causes Social Anxiety ?
treatment for anxiety disorders Disease Pictures
anxiety disorders including types causes symptoms diagnosis treatment ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/eating-disorders/eating-disorders-cause-and-treatment
Related video about Eating Disorders - Cause and Treatment
Eating Disorder Treatment Causes Linked to Artificial Depression
Eating Disorder Treatment Causes Linked to Artificial Depression eatingdisorderfreedomcoach-com How are eating disorder treatment and the causes of eating disorders linked to artificial Eating Disorders - Cause and Treatment
Commonly question about Eating Disorders - Cause and Treatment
Question :
Eating disorders; causes and treatment?
From the hypotheses explaining its causes, what is the MOST ACCEPTABLE cause of this disorder to you? And may I have 2 reasons why?

And what do you think is the most effective (or appropriate) treatment that can be applied?
Answer :
the best way is to video tape someone with a eating disorder and then show the tape to them. This will definetly wake them up and hopefully it will change them because they will feel disgusted on what they see.
Question :
Good intro for a paper about eating disorders?
Eating disorders are serious conditions with which you are so worried with food and weight that you cant focus on anything else. The main types of eating disorders are anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder. Eating disorders can cause serious physical problems, and the most severe can be life-threatening. Most people with eating disorders are girls, but guys can also have eating disorders. An exception is binge-eating disorder, which affects almost as many guys as girls. The signs and symptoms of eating disorders are different depending on the type of eating disorder. Treatments for eating disorders usually involve psychotherapy, nutrition education, family counseling, medications and hospitalization.
Answer :
Pretty good. I think you should come up with something else for your first sentence. You need something that is interesting (maybe a fact or something) and will grab your reader s attention. You should also try to use "eating disorders" a little less and try to make your sentences flow into each other a little more, they are kind of choppy.

How old are you?
Question :
Help, i need eating disorder causes and treatment!!!?
im doing a presentation about eating disorder and i need at least 5 causes and 5 treatment!!!! please help me
Answer :
At 12 I developed an eating disorder because I was on medication. It made me gain 15 lbs a week. My mother kept mentally and physically torturing me about it. She would yell at me whenever she saw me eating. She would throw food at me in front of people and laugh about how fat I was. She would sing songs about fat people to me, and laugh at me. She went on like this for a while. It got to me. So I stopped eating, and if I did eat, I made sure to throw up as much as I could. I stopped the medication, lost 100 something pounds in 4 months. So I started eating again... but VERY slowly. I would prepare a favorite dish and eat maybe 6 times a week until I starting eating closer to right.

Now as an adult, I m diagnosed with nervous anorexia. Whenever I m nervous/ depressed/ worried/ anxious... I CANT eat until I feel better. It s a lesser known form of the disease. I take a sedative whenever I have it bad, but normally marijuana calms me down, and gives me enough appetite to eat. I know many other people with eating disorders... marijuana seems to help most.