Atlanta, Georgia (PRWEB) July 16, 2012 When asked what he liked most about living at Park Springs, Atlantas premier Continuing Care Retirement Community
residents of Atlantas premiere active adult community Park Springs ...

Atlanta, Georgia (PRWEB) July 16, 2012
When asked what he liked most about living at Park Springs, Atlantas premier Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC), one member wrote: The people are friendly, and the atmosphere makes for a very comfortable community. I really feel cared for both by the members and by the staff and administration. I feel safe here and this gives peace of mind to my children.
Based on the 434 responses received on Park Springs annual Community Satisfaction Survey conducted by Decision Insight, Inc. (out of the 492 residents surveyed), a great majority of the members share this sense of comfort and security, which in turn resulted in a 92% Overall Community Average Satisfaction Score for Park Springs.
It is especially a great compliment to our staff to receive these results, notes Michael Heselbarth, Executive Director of Park Springs. This 92% measure accounts for satisfaction ratings on all aspects of life at Park Springs, including our Urgent Response Services, Residential Health Services, and our Health Center.
When asked on an overall basis how satisfied they were with living at Park Springs, approximately 90% of the respondents indicated they were mostly or completely satisfied, and almost all respondents (95%) indicated that they would likely recommend Park Springs to a friend or relative as a place to live.
Many members added comments to the survey to further express their delight about living at Park Springs, such as, I love the beauty of the setting in which we live and the feeling of being in your own home, and I enjoy the wealth of programs offered throughout the year, as well as the wellness center.
Andy Isakson, Managing Partner of Isakson Living, the developer of Park Springs, recognizes that the results of this survey will continue to help Park Springs exceed its members expectations. We are confident that in areas including amenities, governance and customer service, Park Springs far outpaces the competition. We designed Park Springs to create satisfaction on many levels!
Laurel Springs Golf and Country Club
Peachtree Hills residents like the way communitys park turned out ...
The Golfview Villas at Park Springs Featured in AJC
White Waters_Water Slide Park_Sandy Springs Georgia Area Attractions ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/residents-of-park-springs-atlantas-premier-ccrc-express-92-overall-satisfaction-in-recent-2012-survey
Related video about Residents of Park Springs, Atlanta's Premier CCRC, Express 92% Overall Satisfaction in Recent 2012 Survey
Internet at Liberty 2012 Plenary IV - S Abraham C Wong M El Dahshan D Mijatovi
Internet at Liberty 2012 Plenary IV - S Abraham C Wong M El Dahshan D Mijatovi Debate 3 In a world where nearly nine out of ten Internet users are not American what is the responsibility of United States institutions in Residents of Park Springs, Atlanta's Premier CCRC, Express 92% Overall Satisfaction in Recent 2012 Survey