by Catholic Church (England and Wales) GIRL POWER! is paving the way for girls to build confidence, competence, and pride in themselves, in other wo
... Challenge: Team Feel Good (our Mental Mind-Shifters) : Girl Power Hour

by Catholic Church (England and Wales)
GIRL POWER! is paving the way for girls to build confidence, competence, and pride in themselves, in other words, enhancing girls' mental wellness. Girl Power! is also providing messages and materials to girls about the risks and consequences associated with substance abuse and with potential mental health concerns. For instance, did you know:
Girls are seven times more likely than boys to be depressed and twice as likely to attempt suicide.*
Girls are three times more likely than boys to have a negative body image (often reflected in eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia).*
One in five girls in the U.S. between the ages of 12 and 17 drink alcohol and smoke cigarettes.*
Girls who develop positive interpersonal and social skills decrease their risk of substance abuse.*
Girls who have an interest and ability in areas such as academics, the arts, sports, and community activities are more likely to develop confidence and may be less likely to use drugs.*
On the other hand, this also is a time when girls may make decisions to try risky behaviors, including drinking, smoking, and using drugs.*
The Girl Power! Campaign, under the leadership of the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP), Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) is collaborating with the Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS) to provide this valuable mental health information.
* Girl Power! Hometown Media Kit, Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, 1997.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Results from a study of nearly 6,000 people aged 15 to 24 show that among young people with a history of both a mental disorder and an addictive disorder, the mental disorder is usually reported to have occurred first. The onset of mental health problems may occur about 5 to 10 years before the substance abuse disorders.**
This provides a "window of opportunity" for targeted substance abuse prevention interventions and needed mental health services.
** "National Comorbidity Survey," Ronald C. Kessler, Ph.D., et al., American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, June 1996.
What Is Mental Health?
Mental health is how we think, feel, and act in order to face life's situations. It is how we look at ourselves, our lives, and the people we know and care about. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, evaluate our options, and make choices. Everyone has mental health.
A young girl's mental health affects her daily life and future. Schoolwork, relationships, and physical health can be affected by mental health. Like physical health, mental health is important at every stage of life. Caring for and protecting a child's mental health is a major part of helping that child grow to become the best she can be.
Girls' independence is usually encouraged in childhood, and their strengths nurtured. Most girls become emotionally, mentally, and physically healthy young adults. But sometimes, during the transition from childhood to adolescence, extra care is necessary, so that a girl's self-esteem and coping skills are not diminished. For more information on teen mental health, call 1-800-789-2647 and ask for the brochure: "You and Mental Health: What's the Deal?" (Order # CA-0002)
Nurturing Your Child's Mental Health
Parents and other caregivers are responsible for children's physical safety and emotional well-being. Parenting styles vary; there is no one right way to raise a child. Clear and consistent expectations for each child, by all caregivers, are important. Many good books are available in libraries or at bookstores on child development, constructive problem-solving, discipline styles, and other parenting skills. The following suggestions are not meant to be complete.
Do your best to provide a safe home and community for your child, as well as nutritious meals, regular health check-ups, immunizations, and exercise.
Be aware of stages in child development so you don't expect too much or too little from your child.
Encourage your child to express her feelings; respect those feelings. Let your child know that everyone experiences pain, fear, anger, and anxiety.
Try to learn the source of these feelings. Help your child express anger positively, without resorting to violence.
Promote mutual respect and trust. Keep your voice level down-even when you don't agree. Keep communication channels open.
Listen to your child. Use words and examples your child can understand. Encourage questions.
Provide comfort and assurance. Be honest. Focus on the positives. Express your willingness to talk about any subject.
Look at your own problem-solving and coping skills. Do you turn to alcohol or drugs? Are you setting a good example? Seek help if you are overwhelmed by your child's feelings or behaviors or if you are unable to control your own frustration or anger.
DC Universe named Rainbow girl. Her powers came from the emotional ...
Anxiety Girl
... Challenge: Team Feel Good (our Mental Mind-Shifters) : Girl Power Hour
How Your Environment Affects Your Emotional Health
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health/girl-power-is-good-mental-health
Related video about GIRL POWER! Is Good Mental Health
Starseed Awakening Destroy Ego Social Anxiety etcetera
Starseed Awakening Destroy Ego Social Anxiety etcetera my first vlog rambling a little bit GIRL POWER! Is Good Mental Health
Commonly question about GIRL POWER! Is Good Mental Health
Question :
Do girls have more mental strength than boys?
On AVERAGE not 100% of the time boys have more physical stremgth but on AVERAGE not 100% of the time i have noticed girls have more mental strenght and will power than boys. They have mental strength to watch what they are eating and i think can(on average) handle physoclogical pressure better than us.

Do you agree?
BTW im not a sexist so no one list bad fuc**** comments
Answer :
I don t know what you mean by mental strength...but neurologically, women have more connections between the emotional centers and judgment centers of their brain than men do. This gives women an advantage at understanding the source and ramifications of their emotions and might give them better control over how they use them.

But I think a more likely explanation for women appearing to have more self-control in many societies is societal pressures and cultural mores. The U.S. for example presents women with a paradox that requires them to have a certain degree of mental fortitude. In order to be successful and equal, they must often emulate certain male characteristics. In order to be sexually desirable, they must meet the Western ideal of femininity. These expectations on both ends puts a lot of mental stress on women in Western society. In effect, they may have more mental strength than men do, simply because they have higher expectations than men do.
Question :
What are some good books to read?
I liked The Hunger Games, The Forest of Hands and Teeth, and Twilight. Apparently i have a thing for books that take place in or near forests and girls that have to fight back (woman power!) But my favorite book of all time is The Outsiders.
I DO NOT like books that take as much mental effort as books like Ishmael.
thank you!
Answer :
Anything by Nora Roberts, and if you liked Twilight you d probably like The Vampire Diaries. Pretty dumb show but the books are good.
Question :
A good working title for this movie?
I can be terrible at coming up with any names.

Anyway, I m making a stop motion about a girl who is locked up in a mental institution even though she actually has special powers. She discovers everyone in the institution is in the same situation and the doctors are keeping everyone who is "special" in institutions all over the world. They plan to eventually kill of all the "normal" people on earth and have only the "special" people survive.

Any ideas? Thanks. I appreciate all suggestions. :)
Answer :
Special
The Institution

EDIT: Whoa, Alec, we had the same ideas!

The Keepers
Doctors
Mental