Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (P.S.) Why would a talented young woman enter into a torrid affair with hunger, drugs, sex, and death? Throug
Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (P.S.)
Why would a talented young woman enter into a torrid affair with hunger, drugs, sex, and death? Through five lengthy hospital stays, endless therapy, and the loss of family, friends, jobs, ad all sense of what it means to be "normal," Marya Hornbacher lovingly embraced her anorexia and bulimia - until a particularly horrifying bout with eating disorders in college put the romance of wasting away to rest forever. A vivid, honest, and emotionally wrenching memoir, Wasted is the story of one woman's travels to reality's darker side - and her decision to find her way back on her own terms. New York Times Book Review: "A gritty, unflinching look at eating disorders... written from the raw, disintegrated center of young pain... Hornbacher describes such phenomena with a stark candor that captures both their pain and underlying purposes.""I fell for the great American dream, female version, hook, line, and sinker," Marya Hornbacher writes. "I, as many young women do, honest-to-God believed that once I Just Lost a Few Pounds, suddenly I would be a New You, I would have Ken-doll men chasing my thin legs down with bouquets of flowers on the street, I would become rich and famous and glamorous and lose my freckles and become blond and five foot ten." Hornbacher describes in shocking detail her lifelong quest to starve herself to death, to force her short, athletic body to fade away. She remembers telling a friend, at age 4, that she was on a diet. Her bizarre tale includes not only the usual puking and starving, but also being confined to mental hospitals and growing fur (a phenomenon called lanugo, which nature imposes to keep a body from freezing to death during periods of famine).
Amazon.com: Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (0076783023000 ...
Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia, Hornbacher, Marya: Biography ...
Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia, Hornbacher, Marya: Biography ...
Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (P.S.) eBook: Marya ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/eating-disorders/wasted-a-memoir-of-anorexia-and-bulimia-p-s
Related video about Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (P.S.)
Anorexia Commercial
Anorexia Commercial Anorexia Nervosa is the 3rd most common chronic illness among young people This disorder takes over and staves the minds of its suffers Song Wasted: A Memoir of Anorexia and Bulimia (P.S.)