by Alaina Abplanalp Photography It is important to learn about any bipolar mood disorder even more if there is a case in the family as the chief cau
control mood so bipolar disorder can often be controlled with ...

by Alaina Abplanalp Photography
It is important to learn about any bipolar mood disorder even more if there is a case in the family as the chief causes linked with the condition are genetic; some scientists are divided in their opinion about the disorder being caused due to environmental factors, but it is yet to be established. Even if there is no family history of persons diagnosed with bipolar mood disorder, it is important to educate the patient and family members in order to have a loyal, support group that is attentive to the patient's needs and can provide an emotional prop through hard times.
The first and foremost thing people need to know about bipolar disorder is that it affects the emotional and mental equilibrium of the patient; this means, the person is likely to suffer intense and sudden mood swings. One minute the individual diagnosed with bipolar mood disorder will be happy and the next, he'll be extremely sad and then swing back to ecstatic again!
Many a time family may notice this change but not give it due importance attributing it to adolescent pangs or new-life changes at the onset of adulthood, since this is the period when the disorder mostly manifests itself. However, detection of the disorder is important at the early stages for timely control and proper treatment to take place after accurate diagnosis has been established.
Due to the extreme and frequent mood swings, patients diagnosed with bipolar mood disorder tend to lose focus on one topic and their mind flits from one thought to another, with the result that they are unable to make good decisions and can end up harming themselves and loved ones.
Many bipolar disorder patients thus, tend to isolate themselves as they are embarrassed about what they will due since many do not have control over their emotions and can be easily overwhelmed by sudden mood swings; but patient care and counseling that this is the wrong way to go about setting things right will help them realize their condition, its limitations and the need to seek ready help.
Denial and aggression are two common reactions of a patient diagnosed with bipolar mood disorder and many may not even be open to considering medical treatment, which is essential in testing, classifying and controlling the extent of the illness - but keeping family and friends in the know is extremely important for coming to terms with the problem.
... mood , it is important to understand mood and mood disorders so that
... mood disorder of any type should use a mood chart every single day
... states thatinformation about bipolar recognize when your mood swings
... HOW THEY AFFECT ANXIETY, DEPRESSION, AND BIPOLAR DISORDER
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/mood-disorders/bipolar-mood-disorder-important-facts-patients-must-know
Related video about Bipolar Mood Disorder - Important Facts Patients Must Know
Lyme Disease and Bipolar OCD Schizophrenia other Mental Illness
Lyme Disease and Bipolar OCD Schizophrenia other Mental Illness A few important facts and tips on Lyme disease and mental illness including some helpful books that I publish Learn more at lymebook-com Bipolar Mood Disorder - Important Facts Patients Must Know
Commonly question about Bipolar Mood Disorder - Important Facts Patients Must Know
Question :
Do I have bipolar disorder...?
Alright well I have been feeling that I have bipolar disorder since I was 13, and I am 14 now and it s getting worse. My parents don t believe me at all when I tell them I think I have bipolar disorder. They think I m "jealous" of the attention my brother gets because he has asperger s autism, which is a lie. Let me tell you about my symptoms. I am so emotional and have major mood swings. In fact, today was extremely moody for me. Today I was in absolutely the best mood ever this morning and was very hyper, then I became extremely depressed at school. I became hyper again at school, then depressed again. I came home and became hyper again, and recently just became depressed again. I have almost committed suicide a few times as well. I have different variations of my depression; emotionless depression (i literally feel absolutely no emotion), emotional depression (emotionally unstable), lazy/lethargic depression (all I want to do is sleep and lay down all day). I can literally think one minute "Wow, so many people love me and I have so many friends!" then the very next minute I am so depressed thinking "I have absolutely nobody.." Another thing you should know is that I have a very lustful mind. I used to be addicted to cybersex (having sex with people online), and I used it as an anti-depressant drug. So, I don t just use perverted things for perverted reasons, but also to get rid of the sadness. Another thing, but I don t know if this has anything to do with bipolar disorder, in fact it sounds more like something like autism, but I am absolutely terrible at connecting with people. I am socially not there, I hardly ever talk, so people think I m shy. I m not shy, I just never know what to do or say to make a connection and/or relationship with someone! And in case this plays an important role, my biggest fear in life is to have absolutely no friends or family or any relationship with anybody in my life, so I really wish I could connect with people more easily. Another thing, I feel very beside myself on this whole thing. I know many people are going to think that it s just my hormones since I m 14, but trust me. It s more than that. I ve different since I was young, and as bipolar disorder is, it has been getting worse over the years...I have a bad temper as well, I got it from my dad. I m very sensitive and take hurtful things to heart and hold onto them for days or weeks. I am also very very insecure and have a low self-esteem...I have a few weird things I obsess about too. For one, I absolutely can t STAND being in a room with no clocks. Almost every 10 minutes I have to look at a clock to see what time it is. Could this be from stress or anxiety? Which brings me to another thing, I have extreme anxiety. Although I do find it hard to get close to people, the people I do get close to I get wayyy attached to. I have many ridiculous fears as well like heights. I also have the fear of going somewhere in public alone. I feel very unsafe if I am alone in public. I find myself playing the "what if" game, always saying to myself "What if I get murdered or molested if I m somewhere alone!?" I know that it s ridiculous but it s very scary to me. I have diferent sides of me as well. There s the side of me who loves everybody and wants to be their friend, and there s the side of me who hates everybody and think they all hate me. Since I have few close friends, the close friends I do have I feel like I burden them with my problems and stuff. I ll stop now since I know you re getting very bored. An answer would greatly be appreciated! Please don t put a link to a website, because I ve visited many bipolar sites. Also, don t say I should get diagnosed. I ll do that when I turn 18. My parents would never take me.
Answer :
There are at least 17 other common disorders that mimic Bipolar including ADHD, Hormones, Borderline Personality Disorder (which is what yoru description really sounds like)....... get yoru parents to tak you to a doctor. Do not try to tell your parents that you have Bipolar or some other thing... tell them the symptoms you have been living with and leave it up to the doctor to do the diagnosing.

People confuse mood with emotion..... mood affects everything about you. Your energy level, sleep patterns, appetite, emotional response (which emotions you feel and how strongly), your judgment, sexual appetite, etc....... Bipolar is not about being happy one minute then sad the next then mad, that is just having emotions..... The mood swings in Bipolar last a very long time, weeks to months to years and the average Bipolar only swings once or twice a year.

People never never understand the true severity of bipolar disorder. They also do not understand that for an "episode" to be considered Bipolar it has to last all day every day for a week....... That s the minimum, in reality the episodes last for weeks or months or even years. There are cases where a person can have more than one or two episodes a year but it is really rare. There is such a thing as Ultradian cycling in which you cycle multiple times in a day but it is exceptionally rare and there are questiona about whether it is actually Bipolar but instead Borderline PD. Also you HAVE TO HAVE the mania (or hypomania) for it to be bipolar. Without mania it is just recurring depression.

The mood swings in Bipolar do not usually have a trigger. They come and go very randomly...... If someone with Bipolar is depressed or manic there is nothing you can do to bring them out of their mood short of medication.....

This is what Bipolar is like for me.

Depression- to tired to get out of bed, shower, brush your teeth..... lie in bed and stare at the ceiling for days at a time, crying a lot, feelings of guilt, and self loathing, may be suicidal but are too tired to even consider planning it, sleep 16 hours a day or more, eating too much or not enough. I get very paranoid and think that people are staring at me and laughing. I feel like people know what I m thinking.

Manic - over the moon happy or filled with uncontrollable rage, hypersexual (like masturbating 10 times a day or sleeping with numerous men, strangers, your cousin.......decide you are bi because then there are twice as many people to have sex with, decide you are into BDSM and contract to be someones slave for a week), spending your mortgage money on african violets (or some other useless things), driving your car 120 mph, grandiose thoughts (like thinking you can put a new furnace in your house by yourself, or thinking that you can be the president), quitting your job because you are buying lottery tickets with your last paycheck and you know you will win...... only sleep 2 or 3 hours a night and feel completely rested, can t concentrate, racing thoughts (it sounds like 50 people in your head all talking at the same time), talk really fast and loud because your mouth can t keep up with our mind. Drug or alcohol abuse is common.

Again, this has to last for a minimum of a week to be considered a bipolar episode. Everyone with Bipolar is a little different and at the severe end it includes hallucinations and delusions.
Question :
Bipolar: No escape, how do i know what s real?
Ok, this is really annoying. I was just almost finished writing a question then deleted the whole thing! So, i ll start again. I was diagnosed with Bipolar almost a year ago, although i ve probably known a lot longer. Basically, i ve tried Lamictal which i was allergic to, Lithium which numbed me out and now i m on Seroquel to help me sleep. The Seroquel is no longer working as it should and my psychiatrist won t increase it because for some strange reason every now and then i get an allergic reaction to it. Makes no sense to me. Anyway, that s the medication side of it.

Now, this last year or probably longer i have been trying to lose weight. The Lithium put weight on so i ve been pretty much starting and stopping with exercise, losing and then gaining the weight back. These last few weeks i have maintained exercising every day for about 2-3 hours. I know myself well enough to know that it won t last and it will all come crashing down around me. As it did yesterday. I was fine one minute doing an aerobic workout from a DVD, then i was curled up in a ball on the bathroom floor. Strangely though i bounced back from that rather quickly and today managed to be relatively normal. Well as normal as it gets for me anyway. My mood going up and down doesn t really bother or worry me because even though it sneeks up on me i still know what to expect. The rest is really frustrating and heartbreaking.

Along with the huge amount of energy i have been kind of living my own little reality out in my head. I m not sure really how to explain it but i find myself pretty much all hours of the day, and when im dreaming, pretending that i m famous and have certain celebrities as friends. It s pathetic i know but it is what it is. Sounds strange but it is so real that sometimes when i come back to reality i guess i feel as if i ve been taken from paradise and thrown into hell. My world crashes around me as i realise none of it is real and it is so heartbreaking i wish i was dead. This isn t the first time it s happened and i ve been trying really hard to find the pattern but it s not just when my mood is elevated either.

My question is, to all the other people out their with Bipolar, is this a normal part of Bipolar Disorder? Because i realise a huge part is the mood swings and the paranoia (which the Seroquel has actually helped with) but i find the hardest part is giving up that dream in my head. The feeling that i was meant to be something more than i am. I ve never wanted to be "normal" and i guess that s because i never have been. A part of me likes the fact that i m Bipolar because i experience the world on a completely different level to the average person. And i loathe and fear desperately having to conform to a life of simplicity. Getting up every day to go to the same boring job, getting married and having a family. All those things feel foreign and wrong to me. Quite honestly, and i realise how egotistic this sounds, i have always felt i was born to be someone important. That my destiny was to become a famous actress/author/musician and use that power to help save the world through charity. What i don t know is if that s the Bipolar or just some really Narcissistic part of me that should be dealt with. Or, if it s true and it is my destiny.

No matter how hard i try i can shake that feeling and it digs a hole deeper and deeper every time i realise that it will never happen. I ve spent half of my 25 years in therapy just trying to figure out what s wrong with me. I have no job skills, i have never had any sort of acting lessons other than highschool drama and i m with a Disability Employment Agency because i can t keep a simple job. But despite all that i still have this gut wrenching feeling that my life is supposed to be something more. I think the little world i ve built inside my head is part of that.

Anyway, i know this is long and i m just rambling and have probably repeated myself over and over. I m sorry, but i would really appreciate someone taking the time to read it and just giving me some insight. I know everyone has a dream they wanted for their lives, but i can t just ignore it and be ok. I think it will literally kill me and as awful as it sounds, i would rather be dead than be stuck in a meaningless life.
Answer :
What you are describing sounds a bit like what I have, which is called Maladaptive Daydreaming. It s a condition that causes excessive, obsessive daydreaming. The daydreaming is often elaborate and detailed, like a book or movie. Take a look at this website to learn more:

http://daydreamingdisorder.webs.com/

However, I m certainly NOT an expert by any means. I DON T know if your symptoms simply reflect your bipolar disorder. That is a question that you really need to ask your doctor. If no, then perhaps you could have both bipolar and MD too.

Also, keep in mind that Maladaptive Daydreaming is not an "official" disorder since it is just starting to be studied. Very few doctors will have heard of it. Hope this helps. Here are some forums for Maladaptive Daydreaming:

http://health.groups.yahoo.com/group/mal

http://wildminds.ning.com/
Question :
Risperdal Question HELP PLEASE?
Have you ever taken it/known someone who has? Hhas it caused any difficulties with memory and concentration? Over the past few weeks my memory has gone to absolute hell and I don t know what to do about it. It is ridiculous. I am forgetting important meetings and decisions and facts that are imperative to my everyday functioning!

I started the Risperidal about a month ago, 1 mg for bipolar disorder I, after a rather elaborate mania and the recognition for the need of a antipsychotic alongside my antidepressants and mood stabilizers.

Help, please?!?!?!?!
Answer :
Poor concentration isn t a usual side-effect, so I m wondering if its what s left of the manic episode you recently experienced? If that s the case things should settle down as you feel a bit better.
You need to talk to your psychiatrist about it if things don t improve as you may need to try different medication that ll help with your concentration a little more.
For the moment, try carrying a notebook with you to write down stuff you need to remember.
I hope you feel better soon
Source(s):
Mental Health nurse