by camerakarrie Nearly eight million Americans have antisocial personality disorder. If you re uninformed about this condition you can be ignoring t
People with psychopathic or antisocial personality disorder disorder

by camerakarrie
Nearly eight million Americans have antisocial personality disorder. If you're uninformed about this condition you can be ignoring the obvious signs of it in you and the people around you. Back before the miracle of psychology it seemed right to pin the loser label on a person who consistently gets into fights, lies, steals, and lacks responsibility. Truth is those are some of the numerous symptoms of antisocial personality disorder. To pass judgment on these people is as immoral as it is ignorant. I mean imagine if you had a personality disorder that caused you to have unfavorable habits. You wouldn't want to be looked at differently because of something you have little control over. The only thing that can prevent ignorance is knowledge so I'm going to school you. Welcome to ASPD 101. Let's begin with the history of this personality disorder.
Antisocial personality disorder also know by its short name ASPD first came to existence back in 1952 when the mental health book "Diagnostic and Statistical Manuel of Mental Disorders" was published. The book contained a laundry list of one hundred and six mental disorders. It received mixed reviews due to questioning of its credibility, but five revisions later it still accounts as one of the best go to guides for answers. Now that we know a little bit about it's history lets move on to what ASPD actually is.
ASPD is categorized by behavior such as repeatedly breaking the law, aggression, failure to maintain relationships, impulsive actions, lack of remorse, recklessness, irresponsibility, promiscuity, sense of entitlement, and overall inconsistency. An individual with this disorder fails to recognize their actions as wrong which leads to getting no treatment what so ever. Considering that over a half of incarcerated individuals have ASPD it is vital to get treatment if you are suspected to have it. The cause of this disorder is another story.
Like any mental disorder there is a question of nature or nurture. Is a person molded by genes, experience, or both? In this case researchers lean more to nurture than nature. Environmental factors such as abuse and neglect contribute to the chance of an individual developing this disorder. Role models play a part too. If your folks are dependent on substances or have the disorder them self you are more likely to pick up on it. This creates sort of a vicious cycle amongst generations. There is some hope with treatment though.
How To Deal With Children And Antisocial Personality Disorder ?
do i have borderline personality disorder - Health Pictures and Links
Personality Disorders
Mental Health Suite Antisocial personality disorder
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/personality-disorders/do-you-have-antisocial-personality-disorder
Related video about Do You Have Antisocial Personality Disorder?
What is Antisocial Personality Disorder Mental Health Guru
What is Antisocial Personality Disorder Mental Health Guru Everyone feels antisocial sometimes but people with Antisocial Personality Disorder have an almost impossible time respecting or connecting with Do You Have Antisocial Personality Disorder?
Commonly question about Do You Have Antisocial Personality Disorder?
Question :
How does someone with Antisocial Personality Disorder go about life?
I have to do a Senior Project at my school and my topic is Antisocial Personality Disorder. I was wondering what challenges does someone the the disorder face on the regular basis?
Answer :
Go to a black neighbourhood
Question :
How do you treat Antisocial Personality Disorder in teen?
What is the best way to treat a teenager who have Antisocial Personality Disorder & can you please post a link to a website that answers this question in details?
Answer :
Anti-social is a misused phrase or disorder. Someone who is anti-social shows signs of lack of empathy, and tend to be very violent. There is no treatment sadly. I have heard that those who are not in therapy tend to lead their lives in a mental hospital or jail cell, and "grow out of" their disorder by their 30 s. Its a very odd, and intriguing disorder to say the least.
Source(s):
http://www.mentalhealth.com/dis/p20-pe04
Question :
What things wouldnt make you have antisocial personality disorder?
Like what would things you do that a person with antisocial personality disorder would never do. Things that could diqualify a person from having this disorder. Thank you
Answer :
Antisocial personality disorder is characterized by a long-standing pattern of a disregard for other people s rights, often crossing the line and violating those rights. It usually begins in childhood or as a teen and continues into their adult lives.

Antisocial personality disorder is often referred to as psychopathy or sociopathy in popular culture.

Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder frequently lack empathy and tend to be callous, cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They may have an inflated and arrogant self-appraisal (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath them or lack a realistic concern about their current problems or their future) and may be excessively opinionated, self-assured, or cocky. They may display a glib, superficial charm and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon that might impress someone who is unfamiliar with the topic). Lack of empathy, inflated self-appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly included in traditional conceptions of psychopathy and may be particularly distinguishing of Antisocial Personality Disorder in prison or forensic settings where criminal, delinquent, or aggressive acts are likely to be nonspecific. These individuals may also be irresponsible and exploitative in their sexual relationships.

Symptoms of Antisocial Personality Disorder
Antisocial personality disorder is diagnosed when a person s pattern of antisocial behavior has occurred since age 15 (although only adults 18 years or older can be diagnosed with this disorder) and consists of the majority of these symptoms:

Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest
Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for personal profit or pleasure
Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead
Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults
Reckless disregard for safety of self or others
Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations
Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another
As with all personality disorders, the person must be at least 18 years old before they can be diagnosed with it. There should also be evidence of Conduct Disorder in the individual as a child, whether or not it was ever formally diagnosed by a professional.

Antisocial personality disorder is more prevalent in males (3 percent) versus females (1 percent) in the general population.

Like most personality disorders, antisocial personality disorder typically will decrease in intensity with age, with many people experiencing few of the most extreme symptoms by the time they are in the 40s or 50s.

Researchers today don t know what causes antisocial personality disorder. There are many theories, however, about the possible causes of antisocial personality disorder. Most professionals subscribe to a biopsychosocial model of causation -- that is, the causes of are likely due to biological and genetic factors, social factors (such as how a person interacts in their early development with their family and friends and other children), and psychological factors (the individual s personality and temperament, shaped by their environment and learned coping skills to deal with stress). This suggests that no single factor is responsible -- rather, it is the complex and likely intertwined nature of all three factors that are important. If a person has this personality disorder, research suggests that there is a slightly increased risk for this disorder to be "passed down" to their children.

http://psychcentral.com/disorders/sx7.ht