Malibu, CA (PRWEB) April 09, 2012 Dr. Akikur Mohammad, Founder of Malibu Horizon, recognized by many as one of the top addiction treatment centers in Ca
Malibu los angles california alcohol drug addiction rehab residential ...

Malibu, CA (PRWEB) April 09, 2012
Dr. Akikur Mohammad, Founder of Malibu Horizon, recognized by many as one of the top addiction treatment centers in California, and Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences at the University of Southern California, announced today that he and his team at Malibu Horizon were among the first local professionals to implement TMS Therapy into their day-to-day practice. Recent scientific research suggests that once again, Dr. Mohammad and his team are innovators in the science of addiction medicine by initiating the use of TMS for alcohol rehab treatment and the disease of addiction.
TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) Therapy is a relatively new treatment for patients suffering from depression, who have not achieved satisfactory improvement from prior antidepressant treatment. Dr. Mohammad recognized very early on that the revolutionary treatment was having a profound impact on his patients struggling with depression and alcohol dependence. Since early 2009 Dr. Mohammad has been deeply changing the lives of patients struggling with alcohol dependence issues by treating them with TMS subsequently relieving them of their severe alcohol and narcotic cravings.
Malibu los angles california alcohol drug addiction rehab residential ...
Malibu los angles california alcohol drug addiction rehab residential ...
Malibu Drug and Alcohol Detoxification Rehab Dual Diagnosis Treatment ...
the executive drug rehab program at journey malibu s california
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/substance-related-disorders/malibu-horizons-addiction-treatment-innovator-dr-a-r-mohammad-recognized-as-one-of-the-pioneers-of-tms-therapy-for-alcohol-dependance
Related video about Malibu Horizon's Addiction Treatment Innovator Dr. A.R. Mohammad Recognized as One of the Pioneers of TMS Therapy for Alcohol Dependance
Xanax Detox Xanax Detoxification - Malibu Horizon Center
Xanax Detox Xanax Detoxification - Malibu Horizon Center Malibu Horizon is the leading Xanax detox addiction abuse withdrawal rehab treatment center in the United States Unlike other Xanax Malibu Horizon's Addiction Treatment Innovator Dr. A.R. Mohammad Recognized as One of the Pioneers of TMS Therapy for Alcohol Dependance