by normalityrelief While a childhood anxiety disorder can be the same as those occurring in adults, some of these disorders are more common in child
the risk of developing an anxiety disorder among these children

by normalityrelief
While a childhood anxiety disorder can be the same as those occurring in adults, some of these disorders are more common in children and appear at specific stages in their growth. Children, from ages 6 through 9, are more likely to have separation anxiety disorder as well as specific phobias. From middle childhood through adolescence, social anxiety disorder and generalized anxiety disorder are more prevalent. Panic disorder may also occur during adolescence.
Separation Anxiety Disorder
This childhood anxiety disorder is experienced by 4% of all children. Prior to four years of age, a lot of children have separation anxiety and it is perfectly normal for them to feel anxious or frightened when a parent is no longer in the same room as them and is out of view. Once they reach the age of four, they should be capable of leaving their parents without too much concern.
Children with this disorder become very nervous when they are separated from their parents, or primary caregivers, or when they are away from their home. They have an excessive desire to be with the person they miss and feel miserable when they are not with them.
Some symptoms are:
Not wanting to go to school or camp
Avoiding sleepovers
Following a parent around
Not wanting to go somewhere by themselves
At bedtime, they want someone to stay with them or they go into their parent's bedroom
Specific Phobias
A specific phobia is an illogical fear of an object, like a dog, or of a situation, like a fear of heights. Childhood fears of animals and certain situations are common and typically go away. A child may have a phobia if their fear lasts longer than 6 months and gets in the way of their daily routine. For example, a child may be afraid to go outside because he may see a dog.
Some common phobias children experience are animals, thunder and lightning, being in the dark, going to the doctor, water, blood and heights.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
As the name suggests, this disorder is when the child worries excessively over any number of different things and it usually occurs during the ages from six to eleven. Someone with this childhood anxiety disorder is usually very hard on themselves because they want to be perfect and will often do things over and over again until they are happy with it.
Childhood Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Anxiety
Child fear Anxiety Disorders in Children
... and Fitness Articles: Tips to Spot Social Anxiety Disorder in Children
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/childhood-anxiety-disorder-what-you-should-know
Related video about Childhood Anxiety Disorder - What You Should Know
Anxiety Disorders Signs Symptoms of Child Anxiety
Anxiety Disorders Signs Symptoms of Child Anxiety Signs and symptoms of child anxiety are similar to anxiety in adults but children often exhibit behavioral problems in response to their anxious Childhood Anxiety Disorder - What You Should Know
Commonly question about Childhood Anxiety Disorder - What You Should Know
Question :
Should i tell my mom about my social anxiety disorder?
hey , Im 18 years old male and i have social anxiety which started at 4th grade and developed over years and became very severe . so , im headed to collage in the next couple of months and im really worried that it d prevent me from doing certain stuff . i think i need therapy but i dont know how to tell my mom . i actually told her once about it on 10th grade saying that i sometimes cant talk to other people and feel this strange feeling of fear when im around other strange people and she replied that im just too shy (which iam since my childhood) and then brought me a book and asked me to read it , and when i read like 2 paragraphs she said "see? your just too nervous at school thats all what its about" . and since then ive been trying to cope with it . and since no body could understand what im going through ive started cutting and self-harming , and i still do to date . but yea as i said , im heading to collage on the next couple months and im really scared that it would hold me back especially that the collage is abroad and not in my home country . So , should i try to tell her again? and if so , how am i supposed to convince her that thats an actual disorder that needs therapy and not just an ordinary shines?

thanks in advance ..
Answer :
You need to explain to your mother the seriousness of Social Anxiety. Why not do some research and if you can print a good source that explains it well. There are medications that work wonders for those with Social Anxiety. Let your mother know that it is disrupting your life and that without treatment you are going to have a very hard time in college. Unfortunately many parents aren t knowledgeable about many forms of Disorders or Mental Issues. You can educate your mom
Question :
Do I have antisocial personality disorder and social anxiety disorder?
I looked this up online and it said some of the symptoms were:
Antisocial Personality Disorder:
a. Apparent lack of remorse or empathy for others
b. Persistent lying or stealing
c. Cruelty to animals
d. Poor behavioral controls expressions of irritability, annoyance, impatience, threats, aggression, and verbal abuse; inadequate control of anger and temper
e. A history of childhood conduct disorder
f. Recurring difficulties with the law
g. Promiscuity
h. Tendency to violate the boundaries and rights of others
i. Aggressive, often violent behavior; prone to getting involved in fights
j. Inability to tolerate boredom
k. Poor or abusive relationships
l. Irresponsible work behavior
m. Disregard for safety
n. Superficial charm
o. Shallowed emotions
p. A distorted sense of self
q. A constant search for new sensations (which can have bizarre consequences)
r. A tendency to physically or verbally abuse peers or relatives
s. Manipulation of others without remorse or empathy for the victim.
t. . Egocentrism
u. Megalomania
v. Lack of responsibility
w. Extroversion
x. Excessive hedonism
y. High impulsivity
z. The desire to experience sensations of control and power
For this, I have the following letters: a, b, d, h, i, j, k, o, p, q, t, u, v, y
With this, I read that you have to be 18 to be diagnosed, but I m only 14 now and this is really affecting my school work and my life in general. So, can this be diagnosed before 18? I turn 15 on May 24th. Do I even have this, because I feel like I do?

Social Anxiety Disorder:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_anxi
I just used this, but symptoms are too long to list. I exhibit nearly every one of these symptoms.
So, what should I do if I have these, which I think I do. They are really having an affect on my life, especially in school.

More specifically, what should I do about the antisocial personality disorder? I read it can only be diagnosed when I m 18, but could I be diagnosed soon? I ve been having some symptoms since 5th grade, when I had an uncontrollable rage outburst and was later sent to therapy, which did nothing for me.
Answer :
Don t diagnose yourself. You re not a physician trained to diagnose this. Find one.
Question :
What kind of disorder does this sound like?
Okay so, for a while I think I have some kind of anxiety disorder. I looked it up and I have almost EXACTLY the same things that are on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anxiety_dis under the Childhood Anxiety Disorders part. I m 13.

- Last spring I was trying out for cheerleading, and I had to get a doctors appointment, the last one I ve been to. The doctor said I had high blood pressure.
- I ll get really depressed at times, and just start crying and break down and want to die. I ve been feeling this for about a year.
- I ll get really ticked off at people too, for the smallest things. Like my friends will leave me out for a few minutes and I ll get really mad, but I ll be fine in an hour.
- None of my friends get that much stressed at school, but I ll worry so much about my classes and grades even though I make all A s. I want my teacher & everyone else to like me.
- Lately I ve been really quiet, and I used to be crazy and talkative.
- I ll avoid going places sometimes because I m scared of what everyone will think of me. I m not popular at all, and all of my friends are.
- I can t concentrate in school well. I drift off and think of crazy things.
- My heart goes a lot faster than it should be.
- I m always tired. I can sleep for 14 hours if I tried.
- I have nightmares, and I never have good dreams.
- I m really shy and I used to be outgoing, people are intimidating to me.
- I ll have random stomach pains a lot and have to sit down.
- I criticise myself all the time and insult myself. I hate everything about me.
- I can t go to sleep at night a lot, even when I m tired.

Please don t make fun of me.. it took a lot of guts for me to post this. I haven t told anyone.
Answer :
You should tell your school counselor. Don t worry about it too much, if you do have it anxiety disorders can usually be corrected with pretty minimal effort over the course of a few months (for me at least). But you should talk to somebody NOW because the longer you wait the worse the symptoms become and the harder it is to recover.