by elycefeliz Anxiety is a general human experience, which may be defined as feelings of distress and tension where the stimulus is generally unknow
Obsessivecompulsive disorder ( OCD ) is an anxiety disorder ...

by elycefeliz
Anxiety is a general human experience, which may be defined as feelings of distress and tension where the stimulus is generally unknown. However, when such feelings turn into chronic and uncontrollable nervousness, fear or unfounded worry lasting for six months or longer, it is already a disorder. Anxiety disorder symptoms are associated with significant distress and interference with the quality of life, and may be categorized into six types: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, social phobia, and specific phobias. This article tackles symptoms associated with OCD, and how the mental problem is treated.
OCD is a condition characterized by a recurrence of obsessive thoughts called obsessions or compulsive actions called compulsions. Adult anxiety disorder symptoms related to OCD may be clustered in terms of obsessions and compulsions. Some of the well-documented obsessive symptoms are unfounded concerns pertaining to contamination, harm to oneself or to others, religious matters, sexual matters, symmetry, precision, and saving. On the other hand, symptoms associated with compulsion include excessive concern for arranging, ordering, checking over matters repeatedly, too much praying, abnormally frequent need for reassurance on health or related, excessive bathing, showering or washing, and hoarding things.
An earlier diagnosis of OCD in children will result in earlier intervention and hopefully, recovery. The following anxiety disorder symptoms in children are, worth looking into: abnormal concern about one's own health or fear of contracting a particular disease, asking parents or other members of the family to repeat phrases again and again, excessive concern for clothing or appearance, extreme anger or irritability for the disruption of usual and senseless routines, long rituals when getting ready to sleep, maintaining an unorganized collection of worthless items, repeatedly counting aloud, too much fear of going to hell, too much interest in lucky numbers and excessive fear of unlucky numbers, etc.
Other possible anxiety disorder symptoms of OCD, particularly in children include: abnormal fear about getting dirty, asking incessantly about their parents' health and well-being, going back and forth through doors, repeatedly touching things in a ritualistic manner, too many erasures when writing, etc. It may, however, be observed that the aforementioned symptoms associated with OCD are fairly common and definitely seen in the normal course of a person's development. Hence, parents and other family members should have a keen eye on any activities that their child may be doing excessively or repeatedly.
Symptoms of anxiety disorders scheme
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder - Symptoms, Causes & Treatment of OCD
... disorder anxiety - Causes of obsessive compulsive disorder , symptoms
obsessive compulsive disorder ocd is a type of anxiety disorder
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/anxiety-disorder-symptoms-are-they-associated-with-obsessive-compulsive-disorder
Related video about Anxiety Disorder Symptoms - Are They Associated With Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
Anxiety Disorder Symptoms Treatments What is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Anxiety Disorder Symptoms Treatments What is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Learn about obsessive compulsive disorder in this free mental health video Expert Brenda F Dixon Contact LifeHelpNow-com Bio Brenda F Anxiety Disorder Symptoms - Are They Associated With Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
Commonly question about Anxiety Disorder Symptoms - Are They Associated With Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
Question :
What should I do about this anxiety of mine?
I wash my hands a lot, so much that my hands up to the wrists are clearly dry and discoloured and I can peel of the skin. I constantly have these intrusive thoughts and sometimes it is very hard to remove them from my mind. I always have this urge to crack my knuckles. I crack them at least five to ten times a day. I keep trying to get assurances many times from people for really very unnecessary things. I always have a silly order of doing things and if gets disturbed I get very upset. I worry a lot of what people think of me and I m very nervous when I have to do something in front of anyone. When I have to do something in front of the class I get all tensed up my heart starts beating really quickly and my body especially hands and legs begin to tremble. Even when I m talking to my classmates this happens especially when I m not close to them. A few times they noticed it and asked me about it but I simply shrugged my shoulders and said I was feeling cold. I rehearse many times in my mind what I m going to say to even my closest friends and also my family members. I never pick up the telephone unless I know who s calling and I wish to taIk to them. I rarely go outside other than school.Even in the holidays I rarely get out of the house. I like to play sports but I can barely gather the courage to ask someone who are playing whether I can join them.
I ve not really talked about this to anyone because I m not really open with my parents at least in the past few years. I ask them every thing indirectly. Now I ve heard that these kind of symptoms are usually associated with OCD(obsessive compulsive disorder) and SAD(social anxiety disorder). So can you please tell me whether I am suffering from either of them and a please also say what I should do if i am suffering from these.
Answer :
You sound about right with your self diagnosis. OCD and SAD are both anxiety disorders, so it is not uncommon to have both of them. Wether you have them or not, and what degree to which you may have them, I can t say for sure. Thought it does sound like you have them.

Now how to deal with them. When I tell you how to deal with OCD you will probably say "obviously!" or "It isn t that easy." and I know, but it is how OCD is treated. This is to stop giving in to your obsessions and not engaging in the compulsive behavior. Don t wash your hands more than three times per day. Don t crack your knuckles. This will be difficult and you will experience a great deal of anxiety and discomfort for not engaging in your ritualistic behavior; at first. Just press through the discomfort, because this is the only way to overcome it. This is often done with the help of a therapist, and perhaps a benzo (anti anxiety medication) in extreme cases, but it is completely possible to overcome alone. Show your brain and body who is in charge.

As for SAD, I find there is often a root cause behind the anxiety. There is some sort of insecurity you have. If you can pinpoint this insecurity, which is often a dillusion or exagerated belief, you will find it much easier to begin overcomeing the anxiety. SAD can be dealt with much like OCD. Be concious that it is simply anxiety. Be concious of your feelings and thoughts and wether they are appropriate for your environment. Along with this, deep breathing and attention to the movement of the air in your lungs can help calm you down and remove panic symptoms (google: "elevator breathing" for clarification.) Do what makes you uncomfortable and you will realize how irrational your thinking is. The only thing to be anxious about is your anxiety.

Best of luck, I know how difficult it can be as I am dealing with it myself. Take control, don t let it control you.
Source(s):
2 years studying psychology in college

personal experience
Question :
What is the best cure for Hypochondria?
"Hypochondria (or hypochondriasis, sometimes referred to as health anxiety or health phobia) is a somatoform disorder in which one has the unfounded belief that he or she is suffering from a serious illness. Hypochondria is often characterized by irrational fears of being diseased/dying, obsessions over minor bodily symptoms or imperfections, doubt and disbelief in doctors diagnosis, constant self-examination and self-diagnosis and preoccupation with one s body. Hypochondriacs often require constant reassurance, sometimes from multiple doctors, family and friends.

Hypochondria is often associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and anxiety, and can also be brought on by stress."


I have all of those symptoms. i never used to be like this! I HATE IT! I WANT IT TO STOP! HELP!
Answer :
I used to be a hypochondria. Every pain i felt i thought i was dying and i also thought someone was trying to poison me. So i stopped eating unless i saw what was being made even at that used to be really cautious I was about 15 at the time. I became really depressed but now i m on medication for that and i m feeling better now But it has been a long journey as i m now 24. If you wanna talk email me. xx
Question :
Could i have a co existing mental disorder?
im 31, had a misfortunate tough life so far . ive not always has the right care , therapy and treatment in my eyes.

im still pursuing psychotherapy that the mental health team have told me is no resources for in my area up till now, they recently told me they will try to organise some individual psychotherapy in my area, but first , i have to engage in some occupational therapy , which entails me going out into the community , to try get me integrated into society.

because i have lived as a recluse for many years. - i live in a one bedroom apartment , living on disability benifit owning few material possessions.

so far, these are the diagnosis that have been made by various consultants throughout the years :

paranoid personality disorder , BPD , antisocial personality disorder .


how ever, my present psychiatrist thinks i just have bpd, and that all my symptoms can be explained by the BPD.


i think otherwise , im certain i have co existing mental health problems and im pursuing a seperate, independent psychiatric assessment through my gp because i feel things have been missed and that i have co existing anxiety disorders, being : PTSD GAD or OCD.



my symptoms for years have been :

impulsive aggression outbursts , difficulty controlling them , frequent mood swings , from empty and depressed one minute to content and ok the next -

thoughts racing obsessively each day

persecutory paranoia, feeling as though everyone is against me, socially ostracizing me and alienating me - theres a conspiracy against me -

distrustful of those close to me - extreme anxiety , obsessive worries that race through my mind daily , - mind blanking out and forgetting things -

losing my train of thought and sense of self - agoraphobia - feeling i will lose control when outside of anger or anxiety - disocociate , where i will space out in awkward times, like in the supermarket -

struggle to make eye contact because see it as a threat - i stare and zone out. -
vivid scary nightmares - personalise everything people do -

struggle to know how to react or deal with humanity - easily get very enraged , have to fight the rage to stop from losing control -

struggle to focus or concentrate on reading -

struggle to collect and organize my thoughts -

have obssessive worries about health, other things , material items etc. -

feeling paranoid that loutish white trash guys and black louts are persecuting me, trying to control my life -


earlier in life , in areas i lived in, and in secondary schools i attended - i was victimised by gangs of black low life ruffians - and white trashy type ruffians because i was quiet, reserved and sensitive and went to a multicultural school.

i then later got pulled out of there and sent to an all white comprehensive school , where i fitted in , but still didn t like going to school. could nt adapt to secondary school life -

but had the time of my life in primary school., where i had lots of friends.

i never fully got over traumatic big school experience . -

the feeling alienated and socially ostracised by the rest of society. - ive had this symptom for 16 years since my psychological problems came into existence.



my personality in itself is :

im quite introverted and private , carefully choose who i associate with , aloof , reserved , unsociable. - except to those im close to. - slightly misanthropic.



i can think and talk intellectually and intelligently, im thoughtful, considerate , giving to those i know or are close to, but can be very self centred.


honestly , in all the symptoms ive described , does anyone think i could have any co existing illnesses with the diagnosis i already have?




my present psychiatrist is certain i dont have bipolar disorder - because at 1 point, i was worried i could have bipolar.


some of the illnesses that im worried about, especially because ive sustained a lot of trauma in life are :

ptsd . ocd . GAD , general anxiety disorder

autism - adult ADHD - scitsophrenia -

does anyone think i could have any of those undiagnosed ?



i want to get to the bottom of my mental difficulties. so if anyone thinks i could be suffering from other things please say so , or just say what you think.

thanks
Answer :
As soon as i saw "Racing obsessive thoughts", i thought of OCD, but since you dont mention anything about compulsions (rituals) you could have "Pure O" - then again it could be ADHD. Both are linked to Anxiety, which you know you already have, so its likely. I strongly doubt that you have Autism or Skitzophrenia, judging by your symptoms. Its best if you talk to a proffesional and let them know all of this information and that you suspect you may have other illnesses

(IM NOT AN EXPERT, THIS IS JUST AN OPINION)

I hope you figure everything out soon