Health Remedy - Heal Using Natural Medicine SmartProTech LLC,This unique application will give you information about natural ways to cure and most i
Try Natural Remedies to Cure Anxiety

SmartProTech LLC,This unique application will give you information about natural ways to cure and most importantly prevent health problems along with tips to lead a healthy life. Why go to the doctor for every little issue. iHealth will give you information that experts might not discuss. Why take tablets and chemicals with lots of side-effects when there are natural ways to heal and live healthy. iHealth also has information about supplements and natural cures for the below health issues. Natural remedies are not miracle cures. Every body reacts differently, so the remedies have to be repeated until relief or stopped if the condition stays the same after continued use.Please try out the remedies and give me your feedback. For any improvements and new health issues please email me so I can enhance the application.. iPhone@smartprotech.com. I will be having frequent updates by adding/updating health issues. If you want to see anything specific, email me and I will try to include that in the next release.Health issues:-------Acidity, Arthritis, Allergy, Alcoholism, Alzheimers disease, ADHD, Amnesia, Anemia, Anorexia, Appendicitis, Arteriosclerosis (Blocked/Hardened Arteries), Asthma, Athlete's Foot, Autism, Back Pain, Blood Pressure, Bad breath, Bacterial Vaginits, Body Odor, Body Rash, Boils, Breast Cancer, Bronchitis, Burns, C0Q10, Cancer, Constipation, Cold/cough/fever, Cholesterol, Dark Circles, Depression, Diabetes, Diarrhea, Diabetes, Eczema, Ear Ache Infection, Insect Bite (Prevention/Treatment), Edema, Endometriosis, Female Infertility, Gastritis, General Wellness, Gingivitis, Hangover, Headache, Head Lice, Head Ache, Healthy Immune system, Heart Health, Indigestion, Insomnia (Cant sleep??), Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS), Kidney stones, Leg Cramps, Leucoderma (White patches), Migraine, Muscle strain, Muscular degeneration, Nausea, Osteoporosis, Obesity, Palpitation, PCOS Polycystic ovary syndrome, Peptic Ulcer, Piles, Pregnancy, Premenstrual Syndrome, Prostate problems, Sexual Impotence, Sinusitis, Snoring, Stomach Ache, Thyroid Problems, Toothache, Urinary Tract Infection (UTI), Vitamin-D Deficiency, Yeast Infection, Pregnant - Health Food, Sunscreen, Pregnant - What you should Know!, Trying to Conceive?
home remedies, natural remedies, holistic remedies for natural cure
Health and Wellness Keratosis Pilaris Natural Remedy to cure ...
natural herbal remedy provides an immediate cure to the anxiety
Natural Healing Remedies
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/health-remedy-heal-using-natural-medicine
Related video about Health Remedy - Heal Using Natural Medicine
Anxiety - Natural Ayurvedic Home Remedies
Anxiety - Natural Ayurvedic Home Remedies Treat anxiety with natural home remedies by using either almonds or nutmeg For complete information check this short video from homeveda-com Health Remedy - Heal Using Natural Medicine
Commonly question about Health Remedy - Heal Using Natural Medicine
Question :
Why don t westerners use natural remedies for health problems?
In some parts of the world they use natural remedies to cure you for MANY things. You heal fast. These things are not available in the US. They are all man made. Why?
Answer :
You have a mistaken assumption, to some extent. A lot of natural remedies ARE available in the USA, but you pretty much have to look for them to see them. Many family physicians are not trained in alternative medical care and due to some ignorant practices among americans from years ago, they may tend to lump all alternative medicine together with skepticism, thinking it s all "old wives tales." However, to the desparate, those seeking or those with some openness to new things, many people are reexamining alternative treatments for themselves. There are too many people having too many good results to ignore it all. However, people are also having to figure out the difference between what s useful & what s bogus, too. The fake & useless stuff makes it harder for people to believe that any of it is of any use, I think.
Personally, when I got into poor health many years ago and realized it, I didn t have money for doctors nor did I trust them after seeing what happened with some close relatives in various matters. So, I prayed, trusted God, relearned how to eat properly and also learned about nutrients, herbal healing and sports supplements. I ve had great results along the way. Also, when reading about what nutrients & chemicals are found in various herbs, it makes sense why some are effective in certain ways, scientifically.
Question :
Time for the health industry to change and accept a more hollistic approach to health?
I m tired of doctors prescribing medicine for everything. A little headache: Take these pills. Stomach ache: take this medicine.

Heck, i had a serios mysteerious ache in the stomach, and it was so bad i was in terrible pain for 8 months.. They gave me medicine and i didn t even take it, i used herbals and was patient and positive and i healed.

Doctors don t prescribe any natural remedies except for the well known ORANGE juice for colds. They need to appraoch ALL illnesses with NATURAL cures. For example, If you say you re DEPRESSED, they immediately suggest medication. Why? Why not suggest meditation and mental exercises.
Answer :
Unfortunately, doctors are taught how to "fix" things, take symptoms away. They aren t very good in telling their patients how to PREVENT getting that way in the first place. And most people want a quick fix anyway, they don t want to be told they have to change their lifestyle.
I work for a chiropractor, in a rehab type office. People come in with injuries and most want pain killers, they don t want to come in for therapy, they don t want to hear it will take TIME for their injuries to heal. Pain is the way your body says "hey! something is wrong here!!" Too many patients come in and see the MD, get something meant to help them to MANAGE the pain, then they don t come back for their physical therapy, when the pain meds run out, they come back and say "now I hurt worse". People just don t GET IT, just because the pain is gone, it doesn t mean the injury is gone.
Plus the pharmaceutical companies push the doctors to use their drugs, they run commercials so people will go to the doctor and ASK for their drugs.
People need to take responsibility for their health, stop relying on info they get from TV commercials.
Question :
Apple Cider Vinegar Drinking Ideas?
What can I do to make it taste better? Please no negative comments.
Try to give me MORE then one idea please! Thanks!

by the way im not old enough to drink alchol. And yes i plan on sipping/drinking it or what ever action word u want to use.

It IS good to drink ive read many articles on it. heres one:


For centuries people have been using natural apple cider vinegar as both a food and a medicine for themselves and for their pets.
Since 400BC, Hippocrates, the father of modern medicine, and others, have used vinegar and vinegar mixed with honey, as an energizing tonic and a healing elixir.
More recently, the health benefits of apple cider vinegar have been promoted by many well-known authors such as Dr Jarvis, Paul C. Bragg and Patricia Bragg.
D.C. Jarvis, a Vermont country doctor, noted that apple cider vinegar was a respected home remedy used by many Vermonters to successfully treat a number of common ailments and nagging aches and pains.
He was so impressed that he went on to write a book on his observations and experimentations with home remedies, especially apple cider vinegar, and its beneficial effects on both people and farm animals.


First let me say that apple cider vinegar is a completely natural product, resulting from the fermentation of apple juice to hard apple cider followed by a second fermentation to apple cider vinegar.
This natural product retains all the nutritional goodness of the apples from which it was made plus it is fortified with the extra acids and enzymes produced during the two fermentation steps.
It s the sum of all these ingredients that give apple cider vinegar its amazing health benefits.
A compilation of many time honored home remedies used for a wide range of health problems is included in the natural healing Home Remedies section.

Apple cider vinegar benefits include many external uses as well. It can be used to sooth sunburns and insect bites, to make your hair shine, and to treat dandruff just to mention a few. Click on the Hair Care or Home Remedies section for more details on these and many more uses.

Apple cider vinegar fits in well with today s trend towards eating natural healthy whole foods, and away from the overconsumption of highly processed convenience foods, which are depleted of much of their original nutrients.
Answer :
I ve seen many small hand held magazines as you check out in a grocery store. (small booklet type) .
Source(s):
I mix a little olive oil with the vinegar and drink it. Olive oil is also good for pain. A nice small drink of Zesty Italian dressing is just as beneficial.