San Diego, CA (PRWEB) January 18, 2012 As many parents may know, high school can be a frightening and exhilarating time. Teens get their first taste of

San Diego, CA (PRWEB) January 18, 2012
As many parents may know, high school can be a frightening and exhilarating time. Teens get their first taste of freedom as parents get to watch their sons and daughters go off to prove themselves in a demanding social environment. Responsible parents will warn about the dangers of drinking and exercising self-control, but that control can take a dangerous form in the shape of what is being called drunkorexia.
On one hand, some high school teens are forgoing food in order to stretch their alcohol budget. These teens want to drink because they feel compelled or may actually have a problem of some sort. Recent studies from the American Collage Health Association found that 31 percent of students met the criteria for a diagnosis of alcohol abuse and 6 percent for a diagnosis of alcohol dependence in the past 12 months. Not eating allows students to get drunk faster, further increasing the buzz they get from their budgets.
On the other hand, other high school teens are drinking and forgoing food for more physiological reasons. Studies show that 16% of students are combining an eating disorder with a drinking problem in an effort to lose more calories. Most of these students are women.
Aside from the obvious health concerns of binge drinking, mixing alcohol with malnutrition is a dangerous gamble. While both deprive the body of vital nutrients, combining alcohol and poor eating habits in teens is a recipe for disaster. The long-term and short-term effects include impaired cognitive abilities, which often result in lower high school academic performance and increased risk of some of the more dangerous results of high school alcohol abuse.
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/substance-related-disorders/drunkorexia-combines-the-worst-of-teen-alcohol-abuse-with-body-image-problems-and-sunset-bay-academy-explains-this-growing-trend-and-its-causes
Related video about Drunkorexia Combines the Worst of Teen Alcohol Abuse with Body Image Problems, and Sunset Bay Academy Explains This Growing Trend and Its Causes
Authors Google Thomas Goetz
Authors Google Thomas Goetz between the public health world and the tech world Wasnt there was a way to combine the promise of technology with the rigor of public Drunkorexia Combines the Worst of Teen Alcohol Abuse with Body Image Problems, and Sunset Bay Academy Explains This Growing Trend and Its Causes