San Francisco, CA (PRWEB) May 01, 2012 Acupuncture is emerging into a widely accepted method for pain management. Many recent studies conclude that acup
Acupuncture and Hypnosis for Stress Management - Huntington NY

San Francisco, CA (PRWEB) May 01, 2012
Acupuncture is emerging into a widely accepted method for pain management. Many recent studies conclude that acupuncture for post-surgery pain control is very valuable. Research in The Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists concluded that the use of acupuncture before and after abdominal surgery speeds healing, reduces the amounts of pain medication needed, and significantly lowers the pain drug-side effects.
Jennifer Ross, L.Ac., at Remedy Acupuncture in San Francisco, specializes in acupuncture for post-operative pain and scar tissue. She sees first hand how acupuncture eliminates pain in patients who suffer after surgery.
Its very easy to become dependent on pain medications, especially in the long term. Our bodies create a tolerance to painkillers the longer we take them, and we need a higher dose to feel the same relief, Ross explains.
Millions of Americans suffer from chronic pain, and this can be physically as well as mentally exhausting, triggering other symptoms like anxiety, depression, anger, and fatigue. Ross recalls one patients fight to regain her life back, pain free.
Brodie Burris Lotus Center Acupuncture
Acupuncture and clinical depression Acupuncture Info Site
acupuncture diabetes memory 740725 Acupuncture Diabetes: acupuncture ...
Acupuncture School Chicago Acupuncture
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/recent-studies-conclude-that-acupuncture-will-end-your-relationship-with-painkillers
Related video about Recent Studies Conclude That Acupuncture Will End Your Relationship with Painkillers
Os Quatro Cavaleiros do Ateismo - O Debate LEGENDADO
Os Quatro Cavaleiros do Ateismo - O Debate LEGENDADO Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Sam Harris e Christopher Hitchens ASSISTAM tambem a serie da BBC Ateismo Uma Breve Historia da Descrenca Recent Studies Conclude That Acupuncture Will End Your Relationship with Painkillers