by Shain Erin A fat body makes a lean mind , said someone. And you certainly don t want that to apply to your child. So here s the wake-up call- Ch
Obesity in childhood Childhood Obesity: A Growing National Problem

by Shain Erin
'A fat body makes a lean mind', said someone. And you certainly don't want that to apply to your child. So here's the wake-up call- Childhood obesity has taken epidemic proportions in the United States. It is today the most common pediatric medical problem in the country. In an era of fast foods and video games, preventing your child from becoming obese is a challenge.
It's quite alarming to note that a study conducted earlier this year, by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention shows that about 32 percent of children were overweight, 16 percent were obese and 11 percent were extremely obese. Obesity also seems to be more prevalent among boys than girls. With the problem reaching crisis proportions even junk food makers have expressed that children should be steered toward more healthful choices. So what are the causes of childhood obesity and how can you prevent it?
"Children have never been very good at listening to their elders, but they have never failed to imitate them", said James Baldwin at the California Child Obesity Conference in 2003. Children themselves are not entirely responsible for the problem. Adults have a big share in it too. Parents need to develop healthy lifestyles to encourage healthy lifestyles in children. Also, most parents do not spend enough time with children to encourage physical activity everyday. Consequently, children spend most of their time playing video games or watching TV, growing up to be couch potatoes.
Junk food and soda have been primary contributors too. A study conducted by the Kaiser Foundation, a nonprofit organization, found that effect of junk food ads was more on 8-12 year old children, as they are unable to distinguish between ads and TV programs. This age-group is exposed to approximately 21 junk food ads per day. Therefore there is a need to prevent junk food ads during TV programs aimed at children. But before blaming TV ads or junk food manufacturers, here's what you can do to prevent your child from becoming obese:
images of Obesity Heart Problems
Obesity education methods childhood obesity parents fault journal ...
Childhood obesity is a serious problem in America. According to the ...
Pure Michigan FIT - Complications of Childhood Obesity
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/childhood-obesity-a-serious-problem
Related video about Childhood Obesity - A Serious Problem
Childhood Obesity A Weighty Issue in Children
Childhood Obesity A Weighty Issue in Children video explaining problems associated with obesity and some solutions to solve the epidemic Bibliography Dyer Jennifer Type 2 Diabetes A Growing Childhood Obesity - A Serious Problem
Commonly question about Childhood Obesity - A Serious Problem
Question :
How serious of a problem is childhood obesity?
I m writing a paper for my research writing class and I wondering what you all think. I ve been researching this paper for a while and I thought it would be nice to have some outside opinions. So do you think childhood obesity is a serious problem in America today? Moreover, do you know the serious consequences of being obese and if not do you think the media is not being honest enough?

Thanks for your opinions.
Answer :
Let me put it this way. An obese child is more likely to be an obese adult, than a normal one, and an obese adult is more likely to 1) die prematurely 2) be in poor health for some time prior to death. This makes childhood obesity a serious challenge for society and for the health care system.

America is facing a time bomb that dwarfs terrorism, murder and the war in Iraq/Afghanistan. Things are so serious that for the first time in decades the current generation of children actually have a lower life expectancy than their parents. Last time that this happened was WWII.
Question :
What are some of the causes of childhood obesity?
And what are some solutions to this problem?

Serious and detailed answers please, thanks:)
Answer :
You can find very good articles in the Internet about this subject, it is very much in the news right now and some specialists call it epidemic.

The simple answer is too many caloric intake and very little exercise. People are eating lots of junk food and not exercising enough. Parents are the main responsible in this tragedy, you must teach your kids about food, watch what they eat, and you must be an example for them. The problem is that the parents are also overweight and the kids follow that pattern.

It is very sad but preventable with a balanced and nutritious diet, and with an increment in the activity. We must keep active, not only the children, but everyone.

I practice sports and I am in excellent shape, but if I stop exercising an eat like those overweight children, I will be one fat guy. It s applicable to all of us.

Check the Internet and you will find plenty of detailed information on this subject by excellent specialists.

Good luck!
Question :
What can advertising companies do to fight obesity?
The obesity threatens to be one of the most prevailing causes for death throughout the world
and it s a serious problem for Latin Americans especially.

Is there anything that private advertising businesses (not non-profit organizations) can do to help
to fight this epidemic (childhood obesity especially) in country such as Mexico? And at the same time it should make good business sense to do so.

Any proposals would be welcomed.
Thank you.
Answer :
advertising is about creating markets. if it won,t make money, it isn,t going to happen.