New Treatments for Opiate Dependence This state-of-the-art volume integrates chapters on the scientific basis of opiate addiction with a comprehensive
... pill with dollar signs, Methadone Treatment for Opiate Addiction
This state-of-the-art volume integrates chapters on the scientific basis of opiate addiction with a comprehensive survey of the latest treatment methods, including traditional and new pharmacotherapies, adjunct therapies, and management of comorbid substance abuse and medical conditions. An opening section reviews the fundamental neurobiological principles guiding clinical intervention. Chapters then describe the impact of recent scientific breakthroughs on the success of traditional pharmacotherapy, focusing on the evolution of methadone maintenance programs - the primary treatment for opiate dependence for over 30 years. The book also describes and evaluates ancillary services such as psychosocial interventions, day programs, and acupuncture; considers the specific treatment needs of diverse populations; and explores cutting-edge developments in the field.
This book will be of interest to psychiatrists, psychologists, and other professionals working with substance-disordered patients, as well as students in these areas.
... Pharmacological Treatment of Opioid Dependence (Nonserial Publication
Opiate Addiction Treatment Rehab Alternative Outpatient Services
Opioid Treatment Center Blog
Opiate Addiction
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/substance-related-disorders/new-treatments-for-opiate-dependence
Related video about New Treatments for Opiate Dependence
Stuart Kloda MD - Alcohol Addiction - Naltrexone - Topamax - Baclofen - Neurontin - New York City
Stuart Kloda MD - Alcohol Addiction - Naltrexone - Topamax - Baclofen - Neurontin - New York City stuartklodamd-com Call Dr Kloda directly at 646 713-6578 Concierge addiction treatment for New York City and New Jersey Dr Kloda New Treatments for Opiate Dependence
Commonly question about New Treatments for Opiate Dependence
Question :
Naltrexone for self-injury?
My shrink keeps recommending that I let her prescribe me Naltrexone to help overcome my dependence on self-injury. From what I understand, this drug is an opiate blocker usually given to drug addicts and alcoholics, and is only recently starting to be used for self-injurers. The theory is that it blocks the effect of the endorphins when one self-injures, thereby getting the individual not to hurt himself or herself any longer, since it simply doesn t feel good anymore. I m hesitant to go on this as it is relatively new for the treatment of my condition, and, on top of that, I don t really understand how it works. Will it suppress my cravings for SI, or simply stop the "feel-good" effect of SI? Has anyone else, SIers in particular, had any experience with this drug? Did it help you to stop hurting yourself?
Answer :
VERY SUPER BAD idea.....unless you want to endure a week of pain. naltrexone is commonly prescribed to heroin addicts, because it blocks the pleasurable effects. some prisoners are forced to take naltrexone.... the body produces natural pain killing substances called endorphins......if you block them with naltrexone, you will likely feel anxious, depressed, and altogether terrible. naltrexone induces pain, anxiety, and depression, it does exactly the opposite of opiates like Oxy and morphine. you should ask your doctor to give you antidepressants or painkillers instead.


note: for some individuals, after a period of time, naltrexone s bad effects wear off, and they start to feel normal again. when they stop taking the naltrexone, they feel even better. (this is because the body adjusts to the drug by producing tons more endorphins, to combat the antagonistic effects of the naltrexone.)