The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder: Using DBT to Regain Control of Your Emotions and Your Life (New Harbinger Self-Help
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Anxiety: Breaking ...
Even if you've just been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, it's likely that you've been living with it for a long time. You've probably already developed your own ways of coping with recurring depression, the consequences of manic episodes, and the constant, uncomfortable feeling that you're at the mercy of your emotions. Some of these methods may work; others might do more harm than good. The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder will help you integrate your coping skills with a new and effective dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) plan for living well with bipolar disorder.
The four DBT skills you'll learn in this workbook-mindfulness, distress tolerance, emotion regulation, and interpersonal effectiveness-will help you manage your emotional ups and downs and minimize the frequency and intensity of depressive and manic episodes. By using this book in conjunction with medication and professional care, you'll soon experience relief from your bipolar symptoms and come to enjoy the calm and confident feeling of being in control.
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook by Matthew McKay ...
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook: Practical Dbt ...
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook: Practical DBT ...
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Anxiety: Breaking ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/mood-disorders/the-dialectical-behavior-therapy-skills-workbook-for-bipolar-disorder-using-dbt-to-regain-control-of-your-emotions-and-your-life-new-harbinger-self-help-workbook
Related video about The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder: Using DBT to Regain Control of Your Emotions and Your Life (New Harbinger Self-Help Workbook)
Dialectical Behavior Therapy
Dialectical Behavior Therapy Dr Jeffrey Wood PsyD clinical psychologist author of The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook discusses DBT on The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder: Using DBT to Regain Control of Your Emotions and Your Life (New Harbinger Self-Help Workbook)
Commonly question about The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder: Using DBT to Regain Control of Your Emotions and Your Life (New Harbinger Self-Help Workbook)
Question :
Has anyone done DBT dialectical behavior therapy alone/ self help with the books?
I bought the dialectical behavior therapy skills workbook last night and the book I hate you don t leave me. I have started it a little bit last night and am looking forward to learning all of this. Has anyone done this kind of therapy alone? I do not have access to a DBT therapist because my insurance is up. Anyone successful with this?
Answer :
Ariah, it is relatively new to the self-help scene. I have the books as well but admittedly have not yet tried them. I did not buy them for self-help as I have been using Cognitive Behavior for years, but to study to help others.
Source(s):
http://www.pac-connection.com - Free online support group