by bbcworldservice You have lived your life through the years, implanting wonderful memories of your life, like the times you have spent with your d
jva dementia senile Alternative Therapy For Dementia

by bbcworldservice
You have lived your life through the years, implanting wonderful memories of your life, like the times you have spent with your dearest ones, and your goals that have made you soar to the sky. But do you ever wonder how it feels like if, one day, you find yourself not remembering any of those things, no matter how hard you try to crack your brain?
Ever wondered how it feels like when everything that seems familiar to you no longer becomes familiar at all? Put yourself in this position, and you will understand in depth on how life will turn out to be when you are diagnosed with senile dementia.
Senile dementia is a sickness associated with loss of memory. In this instance, one will forget most of the past events, including the events that took place just moments ago. When it reaches the most critical stages, one would even forget who his or her kith and kin are. Normally, the elderly would be prone to it, but bear in mind that it can sometimes happen to the young ones too.
Senile dementia is also commonly known as Alzheimer's disease, because this disease was first discovered in 1901 by Alis Alzheimer, a German psychiatrist, when he was attending to a fifty-year-old woman named Auguste D., the first ever patient to be diagnosed with this disease. Auguste D. succumbed to the disease in 1906.
There were famous people who had suffered from this disease in the past, namely the late Perry Como, a well-known singer, and the late Charlton Heston, a Hollywood legend.
Till today, a specific cure for senile dementia has yet to be found. Even so, it does not entail that a senile dementia patient has no hope of surviving or recovering from it. The road to recovery may be bumpy, but if you never give up, it is possible.
For those of you who have family members who happened to be suffering from senile dementia, they have to be taken care of by means of a different approach.
So let's take a look at how you should handle such patients, whether at home or outdoors.
1. They should take their medications regularly and according to the doctor's instructions, as well as vitamin supplements, especially vitamin E. These medications may not promise a full recovery, but they can gradually improve the brainpower.
2. Bring them for a stroll so that they can loosen up and their minds can be prevented from drifting. If you are caught up with work, you can engage a caregiver to walk with them.
3. Allow them to listen to soothing songs, as they are therapeutic for their minds and souls. This, in turn, can help them improve mind power, get more proper sleep, and relieve the tension and confusion in them.
of early diagnosis and treatment of senile dementia related articles
... myasthenia gravis, in modern times the treatment for senile dementia
National Patterns of Dementia Treatment
senile dementia: can it be prevented?
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/early-prevention-from-senile-dementia
Related video about Early Prevention From Senile Dementia
QLD Nursing Conferences in July
QLD Nursing Conferences in July care and management of people diagnosed with Dementia before they are 65 years of age people affected by pre-senile dementia An Ausmed two day Early Prevention From Senile Dementia