The youth in the present day starting from the tweens for the thirty-something is are brought up straight away happiness way. Once they want a thing, they
that the current recession creates for taxpayers and, as such, has ...
The youth in the present day starting from the tweens for the thirty-something is are brought up straight away happiness way. Once they want a thing, they gotta have it now. Whether they have the available funds to acquire a thing they will get it by charging it on a card. If a thing pauses comparable to their ipod devices or telephone they only dump it and acquire a different one rather then planning to a mp3 player restore or new iphone 4 restore put to acquire it fixed. Together with the the latest economic downturn, this youthful technology has gotten the chance to learn the instruction from their grandma or fantastic-grandma who valued the dollar and took care of what remedy they possessed with no commencing adobe flash player download debt to purchase a lot more items.
One in the 1st instruction the younger generation is needing to learn from the old a person, containing survived a despression symptoms already, is to only acquire what you might afford to at this time. This has become a 2010 very difficult session to teach many youngsters that have generally had usage of cards and never see whatever incorrect with having a harmony on that minute card all of the time. Whenever they can don't spend your debt simply because they lose their job opportunities happens when they recognize this the difficult way. Younger people is now offering to discover to acquire stuff that they simply want vs . what they already want. They also must hold back that ought to be promptly satisfied and enjoy the adobe flash player download fortitude to get results for something they want to get.
Troubled: Rising stress levels are believed to have triggered the ...
Stress At Work During A Recession
http://www.gogofinder.com.tw/books/anita/35/ ...
Recession headlines
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/personality-disorders/how-the-current-recession-has-encouraged-the-old-many-years-to-show-the-younger-ones
Related video about How the current recession has Encouraged the Old Many years to show the Younger Ones
The Financial Crisis the Recession and the American Political Economy deel 1 6
The Financial Crisis the Recession and the American Political Economy deel 1 6 Charles Ferguson shows how useful a varied background in math political science and business can be as he dissects the complexities and recent How the current recession has Encouraged the Old Many years to show the Younger Ones
Commonly question about How the current recession has Encouraged the Old Many years to show the Younger Ones
Question :
WHY IS NEWS MEDIA SAYING RECESSION IS OVER?
Does the news media think that just because they say that the recession is over, because they are afraid of political fallout for the Democrats in the upcoming elections, that the current recession will actually end?

Don t they realize that the reason the recession is still continuing, jobs are being lost and confidence in the Obama presidency is being lost is not because we havent had enough encouraging news articles?

Don t they realize that most Americans understand that President Obama promised change in the way government would do business, and then he signed us up for another trillion dollars in debt, more debt than any one president ever signed us up before?

Doesn t the media understand that no matter how liberal they are, President Obamas promises of a renewed economy through further borrowing and over spending are not believed by most Americans, and their propaganda wont cut it in these hard times?
Answer :
Because the definition of "recession" is a decrease in Gross Domestic Product for 2 consecutive quarters. For 3rd quarter 2009, most economists are predicting that the GDP rose. Therefore, according to common predictions, the recession is over. What s the problem?
Question :
Why do many Mexican immigrants -- legal and illegal -- have trouble assimilating into American culture?
Most of the 10 to 12 million Hispanics estimated to be here illegally are from Mexico. How would granting them amnesty affect future illegal immigration -- especially from Mexico?


Recently, polling firm Zogby International surveyed more than 1,000 Mexican adults across Mexico. The idea was to get the opinions of the average man and woman on the street - all to better understand America s immigration debate from a Mexican point of view, according to the Center for Immigration Studies of Washington, D.C. The conservative think tank is now reporting the results of the Zogby poll.


According to CIS, the survey was the first of its kind to get the opinions of Mexicans, including those entertaining the possibility of immigrating to America illegally.


Many Americans may find the views that Mexicans have on immigration and America unsettling -- and even disturbing.


Critics of an amnesty for illegal immigrants contend it would only encourage more illegal immigration. Well, surprise, surprise: That s just what the average Mexican on the street thinks, too.


According to CIS: "A clear majority of people in Mexico, 56 percent, thought giving legal status to illegal immigrants in the United States would make it more likely that people they know would go to the United States illegally."


In addition, the think tank stated that: "Of Mexicans with a member of their immediate household in the United States, 65 percent said a legalization program would make people they know more likely to go to America illegally."


And that raises another question: Just how many more Mexicans would like to immigrate to America? According to CIS: "Interest in going to the United States remains strong even in the current recession, with 36 percent of Mexicans (39 million people) saying they would move to the United States if they could. At present, 12 to 13 million Mexico-born people live in the United States."


Most Americans would be shocked by how the majority of Mexicans felt about America. According to CIS:


* "An overwhelming majority (69 percent) of people in Mexico thought that the primary loyalty of Mexican-Americans (Mexico- and U.S.-born) should be to Mexico. Just 20 percent said it should be to the United States. The rest were unsure."


* "Also, 69 percent of people in Mexico felt that the Mexican government should represent the interests of Mexican-Americans (Mexico- and U.S.-born) in the United States."


CIS noted that "the perspective of people in Mexico is important because Mexico is the top sending country for both legal and illegal immigrants.


"In 2008, one of six new legal immigrants was from Mexico and, according to the Department of Homeland Security, six out of 10 illegal immigrants come from that country."


CIS noted there are now "10 to 12 million illegal immigrants in the country, seven million of whom are estimated to have come from Mexico. But this poll suggests that many people who might like to come have not done so. This could be seen as an indication that enforcement efforts are effective."


The results of the survey are sure to add to concerns raised by Harvard political scientist Samuel P. Huntington in his 2005 book "Who are We? The Challenges to America s National Identity."


He wrote:


"The persistent inflow of Hispanic immigrants threatens to divide the United States into two peoples, two cultures, and two languages. Unlike past immigrant groups, Mexicans and other Latinos have not assimilated into mainstream U.S. culture, forming instead their own political and linguistic enclaves-from Los Angeles to Miami-and rejecting the Anglo-Protestant values that built the American dream. The United States ignores this challenge at its peril."http://www.americanthinker.com/bl
Answer :
Old saying goes: " Familiarity with someone lowers respect for him", Same thing here, they don`t assimilate because they don`t respect U.S. and our system-to assimilate to it.Other reason is they don`t have need for it-U.S. government & its system caters to Hispanics in their own language in schools and other establishments, and more U.S. government system will be giving in to them-less respect they will have for it.....And those polls taken in Mexico are NOT bogus as some suggest, I read similar polls taken few years back-of Mexicans in Mexico-40% of them said they would rather live in U.S. if they had chance ( that`s FORTY MILLIONS of them.) Giving amnesty to these 12 millions will surely cause next onslaught of 20 million of illegals, not only from Mexico, but whole South America & rest of the world...and that will be THE END of U.S. as we know it.
Question :
Recession 2007 ???
I have written about the great imbalances of the US economy. Yet in all of my previous articles on the subject I have been unable to pinpoint when these imbalances will result in a bust.

One can never be completely sure of the future, of course, as one does not have full information about all factors shaping future events. Thus, it is possible that this prediction will go wrong if the US experiences some future positive shock, such as for example a significant decline in oil prices. Australia seemed poised for a recession in 2005 after its housing market busted, but this was averted as the prices of Australia s commodity exports soared because of increased demand from China.

However, barring such an unexpected positive shock, it seems increasingly clear that we will see a US recession this year. The main reason for this is that the housing bubble that fueled the recovery of the last few years has essentially burst.

While mortgage debt continues to climb, albeit at a slower rate than before, and while housing prices have flattened rather than declined so far, other housing market indicators point to a housing recession. New home sales have reached multi-year lows and the inventory of unsold homes reached multi-year highs. Meanwhile, residential investment has declined significantly from its peak in late 2005. From 6.3% of GDP in the third quarter of 2005 to 5.3% in the fourth quarter of 2006. However, that is still above the 4% average of the 1980s and 1990s, and also significantly above the 3.33.4% level of the recessions of 1982 and 1991.1
So far, the economy has seemingly handled this fairly well and experienced what one might call a "soft landing," with growth being slow but still well above zero. Yet there are increasing signs that the worst is yet to come. Much of the housing bubble was financed by so-called subprime mortgages, mortgages to people with a low credit rating. Subprime mortgages were encouraged greatly by the government, with the Federal Reserve providing a cheap source of credit and with Bush encouraging it as part of the "ownership society" that he envisioned. But after the Fed was forced to raise interest rates again, and as the introductory teaser offers expired, the cost of borrowing for the subprime borrowers increased sharply. And as subprime lenders almost by definition have weak personal finances, many have proven unable to handle that.
And so we now see how the default rate has increased sharply. This will mean two things: first, new subprime loans will decline sharply. So far this year, subprime loans have declined 37% from last year.2
This will not only mean lower demand for new houses, but also increased supply as an increasing number of subprime borrowers are forced to leave their homes. This fact, as well as the fact that construction spending is still at historically high levels means that it is likely to decline a lot more. And if this causes outright decline in housing prices, it will have a very adverse effect on consumer spending. The household savings rate was -1.2% in January and February.3 Meanwhile, despite record high asset valuation, the household debt to asset ratio reached record levels last year, as did the mortgage debt to housing value which hit a record high of 47% in the fourth quarter of 2006.4 Looking beyond the aggregate number, you can see that 27% of all homeowners have less than 20% equity (more than 80% mortgage debt) in their homes and 16% have less than 10% equity, making them highly vulnerable to a fall in prices.5
All of this implies that the current spending pattern is dependent upon a continued rapid increase in asset prices, from levels which are historically already extremely high. Household real estate values, which in my first article on the subject I reported to be 184% of disposable income, up from the historic range of 135% to 150%, had in the fourth quarter of 2006 risen to 213% of disposable income. Meaning that there is certainly a high risk of falling prices which, given the negative savings rate and the record high level of household debt, would imply that consumer spending will have to fall.
With residential investments likely to continue to fall and with consumer spending likely to be weak as well, the one thing that could save the US economy would be business investments. Business investments are still at a relatively moderate level, and in relation to corporate profits they are in fact historically low.
However, there are signs that corporate profits have peaked. The increase in profits over the latest year has been concentrated in the financial sector and in foreign subsidiaries of US firms. In contrast, profits at domestic non-financial industries (the sector that invests) have started to decline: in seasonally adjusted terms, they were 2.5% lower in the fourth quarter of 2006 than in the first quarter.6 And with profits showing signs of declining, it is perhaps less important that they are still at high levels in absolute terms, because what matters for business leaders is not so much current profits, but expected future profits or to be more precise, if businesses think additional investments will generate even higher profits.

And with the pessimism generated by the decline in profits and the trouble in the housing market, an increasing number of business leaders seem to think that the days of high profits will be over soon. Business investments fell during the fourth quarter of 2006, and judging by the weak data for non-defense, non-aircraft durable goods orders,7 the outlook for 2007 is not particularly good.

But what about the Federal Reserve? The Fed has always been "the knight in shining armor" always saving the day by cutting interest rates and they will do so again. At least, that s what many people on Wall Street seem to think. And of course, Ben Bernanke would certainly be willing to provide "liquidity" with or without helicopters if he thought a recession was coming.

However, the fact that commodity prices continue to soar and the dollar is falling means that Bernanke will have limited scope to cut interest rates, particularly in the aggressive way that Greenspan did after the tech stock bubble burst. With businesses being reluctant to invest, and with subprime mortgages discredited, one has to wonder: where is Bernanke going to create the next bubble, the one that will mask the hangover from the housing bubble in the same way that the housing bubble masked the hangover from the tech stock bubble?
Answer :
Dang man! You make some really good points. It is scary. However with oil going down the tubes, technology and the development of alternative forms of energy come to mind. Most of our problems have come from money grubbing government and businesses all making the wrong decisions for the wrong reasons. JMHO