Interesting what is bipolar disorder images: 170 Image by me and the sysop secret 14 isn t a secret to everyone, but the majority of people i know n
What is Bipolar Disorder Chicago Psychiatrist Treating Bipolar
Interesting what is bipolar disorder images:
170

Image by me and the sysop
secret 14 isn't a secret to everyone, but the majority of people i know now (i.e. coworkers) don't realize i'm bipolar. i've mentioned it on this picture and this picture, which happen to be a couple of my favorites thusfar in my 365.
anyhoot, in sum, i started cutting myself when i was 13. i punched walls for a long time, but my mom would complain about the noise i made. i would punch as hard as i could and often cut my knuckles. i don't remember the first time i cut myself, but it was a quieter way of releasing stress.
the first time i abused myself in a similar manner was with a plain old #2 pencil. i etched a cross (from my perspective, upside down) into my left hand between the forefinger and thumb. i kept digging into it as the skin opened, filling the wound with graphite. as the graphite washed out, i would refill it using colored pencils. temporary graphite tattoo.
i knew it was wrong on some level, so one day, sitting on the hearth, i removed the bandaid and showed mom the cross. she was upset, naturally, and made me promise never to do it again. maybe that's why i started using sharp metal objects, to comply with her wish on a technical level.
i was 13 at that time, and i didn't stop for six years. the last date, to be exact, was march 7, 2003. i used the same pink washcloth to soak up/stop the bleeding, and i still have it.
allow me to story tell. once my mother and i were having a fight when i was, oh, probably 16. this was the year it peaked. i confessed to my mother that i had been smoking pot and having sex with strange boys, that i missed my period two months in a row, and i had some kind of infection "down there" (staph, deserved it). after that she tried to be understanding, but i know i would have been just as angry.
she went somewhere after one of our fights, leaving me along with five-year-old sarah. she played in her room next to mine, and i sat in my pink bean bag and started tearing my arms up with dull scissors. i felt awful, and i wanted it to be ugly and painful. i dug and dug until blood was dripping all over my arms and legs. mom walked in, scissors still in my hands, and went berserk. she asked how could i do that with sarah in the next room? what if i go too far and kill myself? how does she explain to a five-year-old that her sister is gone and never coming back?
What Is Bipolar Disorder ?
Bipolar Disorder Symptoms Bipolar Disorder
What is Bipolar Disorder ? W e all get excited by new ideas, pursue ...
What Is Bipolar Disorder Depression Disability
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/mood-disorders/nice-what-is-bipolar-disorder-photos
Related video about Nice What Is Bipolar Disorder photos
Do i have an Bipolar Disorder Anxiety Recovery Program Depression Recovery Treatment
Do i have an Bipolar Disorder Anxiety Recovery Program Depression Recovery Treatment do i have an anxiety disorder anxiety vs depression alcohol and depression alcohol depression depression recovery all about depression Nice What Is Bipolar Disorder photos
Commonly question about Nice What Is Bipolar Disorder photos
Question :
Is Schizoaffective Disorder Schizophrenia and Bipolar in the one condition?
Hi everyone. I hope you ve had a nice day. I was diagnosed with Schizoaffective Disorder last year after a spell in hospital.Is it basically Schizophrenia and Bipolar in the one condition?And what is the prognosis compared to Bipolar Disorder?Thanks for your time guys.Take care.
Answer :
Hi
i am no medical practitioner but they are two problems each with different issues which need some kind of control drugs i believe.
Question :
What does bipolar disorder feel like?
Ill read whatever you have to type, not matter how long. I want to know about this because I am pretty sure I ve got a mental illness and bipolar is on the top of my list of what s likely.
And Im not an idiot, I know I can t just say that I ve got it, I need to see a psychologist but I can t for a while so information would be nice.
Answer :
Everyone has moods like those of Bipolar Disorder....... because everyone has mood swings, momentary loss of judgment, likes to go shopping, likes sex, feels down sometimes, gets angry now and then and is hyper on occasion. The difference is that all of these symptoms in Bipolar are so intense that they interfere with your ability to function. Think of a pole (biPOLEr) with 0 at the center (0 being normal) and 10 at one end (manic) and -10 at the other (deep depression). Most people have swings but stay within 3 to -3. I have fairly severe Bipolar 1 but since my psychosis is mild I go from -9 to 9.... Also depression that comes and goes is not bipolar but just recurring depression, you have to have mania for it to be Bipolar..... you have to go to both ends of the pole.

Rapidly changing emotions or becoming angry or sad easily is not all there is to Bipolar. That is just having emotions. People with Bipolar Disorder do not just change emotions quickly, they go through periods of depression followed by periods of mania or elevated mood. Mood affects everything about you.... your energy level, self esteem, sleep patterns, appetite, sexuality, emotional response, judgment, etc..... not just your emotions. And while rapid cycling is possible, it is rare. The average person with Bipolar only cycles two or three times a year and the moods last for weeks or months. It is considered rapid cycling if they cycle 4 or more times in a year.

While everyone with Bipolar has a different set of symptoms and a different severity of symptoms, this is what Bipolar is like for me:

Depression - too tired to get out of bed, shower, even to brush my teeth. Cry all the time, sleep 16 hours a day. Feelings of self loathing and guilt that drive me to think of suicide but I m to tired to even think about how to go about killing myself. It makes you feel small and worthless and completely insignificant. It makes you think about how big the world is and how meaningless you are in it..... and it refuses to let you have any good thoughts or see any good things.... when you look in the mirror all you see is pain, you don t even see yourself, you don t taste your favorite foods anymore, see that flowers are blooming, whether or not the sun is out, you become so inward that you hardly even notice your surroundings..... You don t even feel love for people anymore.... positive thoughts are just not possible...... it is a deep dark hole with no way out and no light for hope.... and most of all it makes you feel sooooo alone. And even if there were someone who cared about you they would be better off if you killed yourself....... because all you will ever be is a burden....... this can last from a couple of weeks to a couple of years.

Mania - Way too happy! PARTY GIRL! love drink and drugs. Talk really fast and pressured because my thoughts are going faster than my mouth can keep up with. Hypersexual - like I sleep with strangers and guys I just met on the internet or I masturbate 10 times a day. I once became bisexual because there were twice as many people to sleep with. down load porn and spend tons of money on sex toys. Spending sprees..... I once spent my mortgage money on african violets, yep, $1500 on African violets (then I got depressed and let them all die). Quit my job because I wanted my vacation pay for lottery tickets and I was so convinced I would win that I started shopping and writing bad checks because I d be rich as soon as the numbers were drawn. Decided that I could replace the furnace in my home by myself... I mean how hard can it be..... Only sleep 2 or maybe 3 hours a night for months on end and never feel tired. In the end I was unemployed, $30,000 in debt, and had almost lost my home, which needed a new furnace because I had removed the old one.. or parts of it anyway. This can last for months.

I also have mixed states when I am depressed and manic at the same time which are truly the worst... By body and mind are depressed but there is this undercurrent of energy running all the time..... I m highly emotional but the emotions tend to be negative (guilt and anger) I have intrusive thoughts and urges to mutilate myself (like wanting to stick my hands in the garbage disposal or cooking them on the BBQ), and I also have psychotic episodes where I hallucinate. This is when I am most suseptible to suicide because I am depressed, wanting to hurt myself, and I have the mental energy to plan and carry it out
Question :
What is the dating outlook for a thirty five year old man with bipolar disorder?
I haven t dated since college. I m just now asking women to meet me for coffee. I asked five women this year and every one of them said no. They have no idea about my illness. Be nice please.
Answer :
My dad, best friend and youth pastor s wife are all bipolar. There is nothing wrong with being bipolar. If someone doesn t even want to give you a chance because you have this disorder then you shouldn t want to give them a chance. Maybe you should try starting a conversation with them and ask them about their hobbies. Then ask them for coffee, or dinner, or lunch.
Good luck*