by Topeka & Shawnee County Public Library There are different views on how to handle the question of why. Some believe there is benefit for the fami
What Causes Anorexia

by Topeka Shawnee County Public Library
There are different views on how to handle the question of why. Some believe there is benefit for the family to explore why the eating disorder developed; others assert the reasons are not important, it is a fruitless discussion and will only assign blame to the parents. I believe there is value in discussing what causes anorexia and for the family to ask why? Here are my reasons for you to consider.
oOne reason is the question itself is often the first question parents ask. To not discuss it is like the proverbial elephant in the room that everyone sees but no one talks about. If approached with compassion and a heart only to help the family, it is possible for parents to look at this issue objectively and not absorb horrible amounts of blame. This awareness can also give your daughter permission to talk about hurts or disappointments that have occurred in the family, and relationships can be strengthened and healed.
oThe second reason is I don't think parents want to be handled with kid gloves. They want to know the truth, even if it hurts. Every parent I have worked with has said they will do anything to help their daughter, they just want to know what to do and they will do it. That includes looking at their families through new eyes, because every family sees things differently once their daughter or son has an eating disorder.
Let's really consider this. If I say to a parent it really doesn't matter what causes anorexia or why this happened, you just need to move forward from here; in reality that statement doesn't go over very well. I believe in part it is because they want to know the truth, but I also think that statement feels condescending. I might as well tell them you can't handle the truth so let's just not go there.
No one likes to be told, even if it's veiled in compassion, they are not strong enough or capable of handling or helping their own child. I think it is disrespectful not to help parents explore all pieces of the puzzle that contributed to their daughter's life threatening illness; even if it means they have to look in the mirror.
oThe third reason is because the question itself is often a spiritual one. It implies a desire to find meaning in this crisis. Exploring this can open the window a crack to look at life in some deeper ways. When we explore why things happen, we invite growth and transformation for ourselves and our children as well.
What Causes Anorexia ?
Causes of Anorexia Nervosa
images of Depression Causes Anxiety
Causes of Eating Disorders
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/eating-disorders/what-causes-anorexia-is-it-important-to-know-why-it-happened-to-us
Related video about What Causes Anorexia? Is it Important to Know Why it Happened to Us?
Part 2 Why Drugs Social Anxiety Borderline OCD Self Injury Anorexia
Part 2 Why Drugs Social Anxiety Borderline OCD Self Injury Anorexia What Causes Anorexia? Is it Important to Know Why it Happened to Us?
Commonly question about What Causes Anorexia? Is it Important to Know Why it Happened to Us?
Question :
What causes anorexia and how to prevent falling into it s trap?
I found that I have been quite weight conscious recently. I haven t binged or purged or started dieting yet, but I m planning to start dieting. I m just afraid that I won t be able to handle it.
Answer :
Anorexia doesn t happen to normal well-rounded people. It usually happens to girls between the ages of 16 and 18. It stems from self-hatred and believe it or not, it s a control issue. The person loathes themselves for being fat or unloved by others and they feel like they have no control over things in their lives. I had anorexia when I was between 16 and 18. I hardly ate anything for 2 years! I hated myself because I had a terrible alcoholic father that resented having us kids because he couldn t take all his money and gamble with it. He had to support us. I think it was my way of getting back at him and being liked by my peers all at the same time. Don t be afraid to diet. If you have normal feelings about yourself and have some control in your life, you ll be fine.
Question :
What causes anorexia?
I am studying Sociology at GCSE and have to complete coursework. My hypothesis is Celebrities are the main cause of the increase of anorexia in teenage girls
I understand that this is very unlikely to be true and it differs from case to case but I needed something to prove/disprove so that s what I wrote!
It would be really useful if anyone has any opinions/facts or experience in what the causes of anorexia are or just have an opinion on how celebrities are influencing teens.

Thanks x
Answer :
Chuck Norris instills the fear in them
Question :
Need help! Project on causes of anorexia. Need someone to interview?
Is anyone willing to answer a few questions on what they believe causes anorexia? Ill do it online so I won t know who you are. Anyone who has suffered would be really helpful (its for coursework in Sociology) but anyone who has a professional opinion or just anyone who has an opinion would also be very helpful.
Thank youx
Answer :
yeah