Some interesting manic depression test images: Tangled up in blue Image by Rookuzz Hello out there.. I got tagged, as they call it. On Internet one
Manic Depression
Some interesting manic depression test images:
Tangled up in blue

Image by Rookuzz
Hello out there..
I got tagged, as they call it. On Internet one has an avatar, and mostly not for nothing. Now people started a game asking one to remove the veil as much as one dares. It is like the old game of Play Tag, so, "being it" I must tag some other recluse, who is undoubtedly going to kill me, so I picked someone who could only do so by using a bomb-letter.
Here comes my nineteenth nervousbreakdown, as Mr Jagger once said.
1. I was born in januari 1941, at about 01.30, after six month of marriage of my Christian born parents, weighing remarkably much for a primature. Nothing I could do about it and I did not question my name, Robert, in contrast to the rest of the family, who were trying to figure out who this Robert must have been in the past of my rather Victorian mother. No Faith was mentioned after that, the families' reaction on the issue had not amused her.
My little sister, who could count, reveiled me the situation afterwards, when I was about 30.
I am maybe a little naive.
2. My first four years I lived happily with my parents, while the outside the world was in flames. We lived in Deventer, which had two bridges, an attractive target for the Allies. There were no Smart Bombs then.
We moved to the centre in november 1944; the next day our house was bombed, killing some collaborators, but not me. I still remember the faces of the people hiding in our big cellar during the raids.
I knew what happened, I am not tht naive.
3. My kindergarten-teacher describes me as an intelligent kid, living in his own phantasyworld, sensitive, very honest, with a veil that could be seldomly lifted, difficult for himself and others, very exstatic at times, with a good sense of humour. I drew and painted a lot and had a keen interest in learning.
I was a little naive too.
4: After the usual quiet years before adolescense I went to secondary school, where, besides learning some languages, I got in touch with chemistry and became an Alchimist.
My father being a medical doctor, I could get almost everything I wanted with his prescription papers. Very fortunate. I had a lot of luck, nearly blowing myself up a couple of times, after which my parents asked me kindly to do other experiments. I did not, I was somewhat naive in those days.
I also met my Partner for Life. It was 1959. And I started with photography, and loved details and composition.
Manic Depressive Test - Bipolar Depression Questionnaire - By Polar ...
Manic Depression Test - Website of nesiagon!
signs depression stress anxiety symptoms of anxiety teenage depression ...
Anxiety And Depression Treatment Nhs Images
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/nice-manic-depression-test-photos
Related video about Nice Manic Depression Test photos
My Secrets
My Secrets video 1 Im bipolar and have major anxiety issues My mood swings are hard to control even on medication I either manic depressed or Nice Manic Depression Test photos