San Antonio, TX (PRWEB) August 14, 2008 Despite his public image as a devoted husband and family man, North Carolina Senator John Edwards recent affair
JB: John Edwards' trial?
San Antonio, TX (PRWEB) August 14, 2008
Despite his public image as a devoted husband and family man, North Carolina Senator John Edwards' recent affair should not have come as a surprise, according to the Dave Patrick of Redvet, Inc., publishers of a new website and electronic book on relationships.
In his statement for the media, Edwards admitted to becoming "narcissistic." Relationship counselors quoted in the book say narcissists often stray, and signs of narcissism are not hard to detect-especially among the prominent and powerful.
Narcissism is just one of dozens of personality traits discussed in "101 Tipoffs That Your Prince Charming Is Just Another Frog in Disguise." The book lists often-overlooked-or sometimes ignored-warning signs that might eventually lead to a disappointing, unfulfilling, and possibly even ruinous relationship.
A new website was published simulataneously at http://www.ishouldhaveknownbetter.com
The book, website and an accompanying discussion forum are a collaborative effort of a group of freelance writers and contributors with almost 150 years of combined marriage or dating experience. The book is edited by Dave Patrick of Redvet Inc., an electronic publishing company based in San Antonio, TX.
Buy Almost Dead Movie. Watch online or Download *** QubMovies, Almost ...
by john hall 4 29 2011 11 53 29 am
Buy Almost Dead Movie. Watch online or Download *** QubMovies, Almost ...
Harvey Korman: Video Tribute to the Quintessential Ham DBKP ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/personality-disorders/was-john-edwards-affair-predictable-authors-of-101-tipoffs-that-your-prince-charming-is-just-another-frog-in-disguise-say-yes
Related video about Was John Edwards' Affair Predictable? Authors of "101 Tipoffs THat Your Prince Charming Is Just Another Frog in Disguise" Say Yes.
A Cunning Lingoist - John Edwards Mistress Rielle Hunter - iOwnTheWorld-com
A Cunning Lingoist - John Edwards Mistress Rielle Hunter - iOwnTheWorld-com John Edwards Mistress on Lingo - 2002 Johnny Reid John Edwards 1 born June 10 1953 is an American politician who served as a US Was John Edwards' Affair Predictable? Authors of "101 Tipoffs THat Your Prince Charming Is Just Another Frog in Disguise" Say Yes.