Alcoholics Anonymous: the "Big Book" (The key text of Alcoholics Anonymous) NOTE: This edition has a linked "Table of Contents" and has been beautiful
Alcoholics Anonymous: the "Big Book" (The key text of Alcoholics ...
NOTE: This edition has a linked "Table of Contents" and has been beautifully formatted (searchable and interlinked) to work on your Amazon e-book reader, Amazon Desktop Reader, and your ipod e-book reader.
This is the key text of Alcoholics Anonymous, and was a seminal work in the development of 12-step programmes to treat addictions.
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is a worldwide fellowship of men and women who share a desire to stop drinking alcohol. AA suggests members completely abstain from alcohol, regularly attend meetings with other members, and follow its program to help each other with their common purpose; to help members "stay sober and help other alcoholics achieve sobriety."
AA created the twelve-step program used by similar recovery groups like Al-Anon, an auxiliary group for friends and family members of alcoholics; and Narcotics Anonymous, a group for substance abusers who may or may not also identify as alcoholics.NOTE: This edition has a linked "Table of Contents" and has been beautifully formatted (searchable and interlinked) to work on your Amazon e-book reader, Amazon Desktop Reader, and your ipod e-book reader.
This is the key text of Alcoholics Anonymous, and was a seminal work in the development of 12-step programmes to treat addictions.
Big Book of Alcoholics Anonymous App for iPad, iPhone - Lifestyle ...
Alcoholics Anonymous Big Book mp3 online Dabney Dallarton
Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous (also known as Alcoholic Anonymous ...
Alcoholics Anonymous Big Book NEW Leather Study Edition - Nonfiction ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/substance-related-disorders/alcoholics-anonymous-the-big-book-the-key-text-of-alcoholics-anonymous
Related video about Alcoholics Anonymous: the "Big Book" (The key text of Alcoholics Anonymous)
Alcoholics Anonymous - Key Concepts from the 1940s
Alcoholics Anonymous - Key Concepts from the 1940s Wally P - aabacktobasics-org Alcoholics Anonymous - Key Concepts from the 1940s 1 Put no block between the newcomer and Step Twelve Alcoholics Anonymous: the "Big Book" (The key text of Alcoholics Anonymous)