by eyewashdesign: A. Golden Depression is a serious infliction that affects almost 15 million Americans every year. It s a proven illness. Although
... overcome depression will help you fight depression and beat it in time

by eyewashdesign: A. Golden
Depression is a serious infliction that affects almost 15 million Americans every year. It's a proven illness. Although it is defined as a mental illness this is no reflection on the personal attributes of the inflicted. Depression can affect anyone. It's path has no pattern. It will affect the rich as well as the poor. Race or religion aren't important. Strength or weakness isn't a factor with this disease. The age-old stereotype that has been associated with a mental illness must be ignored. The suffering associated with this disease will only get worse without treatment. Ignoring the signs will not make it disappear. If a person doesn't seek medical attention, the disease becomes worse until it dominates their entire life.
Depression can result from a number of sources. It's not a matter of a day or two of confusion or sadness, this disease is much more. Months or even years are the time frame in which depression plays. Depression at its worse can lead one to the act of suicide. Remorse is often a feeling associated with the early stages. It's possible that the disease will steal away the enjoyment you used to have for favorite hobbies. You can experience loneliness and despair. You may feel like a failure at life and cannot see where the future is going to get any better. Your entire personality can change as time passes. You will feel the affects at work, at school and at home. It will upset your sleep habits and cause your anxiety to grow.
Depression has many causes. Stress can be a major factor. Stress itself has many causes such as losing a friend or being told you have a serious medical condition. It can be passed on genetically. It can be caused by abuse rather it be physical, emotional or sexual. Looking at the monthly bills might cause it. There is so much stress in the world today to compete and satisfy those in our society. This condition can be serious. There is assistance for people who look to be treated. Studies have shown that only a third of that 15 million Americans that are affected by depression will ask for assistance. It's important that you look for assistance, or if a loved one is affected find help for them.
Help For Depression How to get rid of depression
Popular Self - Help Books For Anxiety, Depression And Trauma:
Help With Anxiety And Depression Techniques For Anxiety Now
... help you get better anxiety disorders over anxiety and depression
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/depression-help-get-help-with-depression
Related video about Depression Help - Get Help With Depression
Medical Marijuana Helps Epileptic Seizures Depression and Anxiety
Medical Marijuana Helps Epileptic Seizures Depression and Anxiety Transcription to follow Hello my name is John Heneska and I am a medical marijuana patient I am 28 years old and have been a patient for about Depression Help - Get Help With Depression
Commonly question about Depression Help - Get Help With Depression
Question :
How can I get help for my depression without my parents finding out???? Please help me! :( ?
I am always sad, tired and I cut my wrists at least once a day now. I m not stupid and I know I m depressed and I want to get help so I stop cutting my wrists. The problem is that if my parents find out they will never treat me the same way. They don t even believe depression is a thing, and I they knew I cut my wrists they d probably just think I m mental. What can I do? I m 17
Answer :
i used to be like that, my parents never found out, im now 16 and living life at my best
you need to really stop with the wrist cutting, totally not worth it! you need to hang out with friends, go out places, be social, dont be home in a shadow, most importantly, smile more often. if smiling is hard, pretend to smile, pretend to have fun, soon enough, you wont be pretending and you actually will see a change for the better (: im so sorry for what youre going through, thinking no one could understand, but a lot of people go through this, and youre never alone, remember that. i wish you the best
Source(s):
myself
Question :
Depression help online?
Lately I have been feeling really depressed and I have been cutting. I want to know if I can get any help online where I can talk to someone?
Answer :
I have been in your possion and it sucks. But I go on sixbillionsecrets chat and compassionpit. Sometimes it s hard to find people who help but you will eventually I promise because people care. I know me saying don t cut isn t going to stop you but please try really hard not too. I also recommend leaving your house go outside! And if you want im always here to listen just message me! Maybe I can help since I have been there before and I have seen plenty of people hit rock bottom. I hope you get better!! Just try to get out of your own mind!
Source(s):
Me and my life! Hope I helped! Good luck.
Sources: sixbillionsecrets.com chat
And compassionpit
Question :
I feel like I m slipping back into depression, help?
From around 6th to 8th grade I was really depressed from having no friends and the ones I had were awful to me. That caused me to cut myself and I really thought about killing myself. My mom found out and I had to stop cutting myself but I never got help. Summer of 9th grade all my "friends" turned on me and I was even more depressed but somewhat relieved. When 9th grade came I made friends that actually care about me except one really toxic one. She s really cold and pushes me around and makes me feel like crap. Up till last night this was all normal until I decided to not do what she said which caused her to flip out on me. I m afraid I ll lose all my friends again and I m getting really sad about this. I get sad really easily and its killing me. I want to get my razor back out and start cutting again. I may be overreacting but I m a really nervous case and I dont take this very well. It hit me today and I ve been just crying and I don t know what to do. Please help?!?
Answer :
Tel your friends about this what she s doing to u before she gets all ur friends to hate u