Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder Geared to the needs of mental health practitioners unfamiliar with dissociative disorders, th
Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder, Putnam ...
Geared to the needs of mental health practitioners unfamiliar with dissociative disorders, this volume establishes a comprehensive and integrated approach to their diagnosis and treatment. Each step- from first interview to final post-integrative treatment- is systematically reviewed, with detailed instructions on specific diagnostic and therapeutic techniques and examples of their clinical application. This concise yet thorough volume offers expert advice on when and how to begin therapy, what clinical signposts to watch for, and what basic errors to avoid. This book will be of interest to psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, social workers, and other mental health practitioners.
... importance for the diagnosis of personality disorders are their
Personality disorder
Multiple Personality Disorder: Diagnosis, Clinical Features, and ...
dissociative personality disorder Dissociative Personality Disorder
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/psychotic-disorders/diagnosis-and-treatment-of-multiple-personality-disorder
Related video about Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder
Acute Personality Disorder corrected by our Scientific Treatment Center
Acute Personality Disorder corrected by our Scientific Treatment Center Acute Personality Disorder corrected by our Scientific Treatment Research After several treatments this young woman was completely corrected of Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder
Commonly question about Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder
Question :
Books on self-diagnosis and treatment for Multiple Personality Disorder?
Has anyone ever heard of The Courage to Heal workbook for survivors of childhood sexual abuse? Well I m looking for a workbook that s similar to that, but only for possible MPD/DID. I m trying to find a book where I can first assess or self-diagnose it, and then perhaps work through a book to treat it, if necessary. If I do have this disorder, I believe it s a mild case, and I d like to handle it on my own if possible. I m trying to avoid doctors and psychiatrists, because I don t want to drag my husband and children through it.

I ve looked on Amazon and the like, but it seems they are mostly just educational books to read. I m having trouble finding one with any assessment exercises. Does anyone know of any? Or perhaps a web site where I can go to look into the disorder in more depth?
Answer :
you cant assess MPD, because if youre really having it, you wont remember anything that would remind you of anything you did when your other personality shows up, unless somebody tells you that you stole a chanel handbag last wednesday or gone wild on a bar friday night, so ill just refer you.

INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR THE STUDY OF MULTIPLE PERSONALITY AND DISSOCIATION

5700 Old Orchard Road, 1st floor
Skokie, IL 60077 1024
708-966-4322



or get in touch with a psychologist.
Question :
Good study books for multiple personality disorder, (D.I.D)?
I am studying this psychiatric illness for my extended project at school and I just need to know any good books which would be of good use for me, considering i will only be using them for a limited amount of time, I don t really want to waste my money on a book which won t help me.

I want to investigate into how D.I.D affects the brain (which parts are affected etc) and the life of the sufferer. I also would like to just take a deeper look into why people with D.I.D suffer from this disorder and the treatment and therapy available. I will obviously need a range of different books to cover all of these aspects, any ideas?

I ve looked at:
The Osiris Complex: Case Studies in Multiple Personality Disorder
Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality Disorder (Foundations of Modern Psychiatry)
The Dissociative Identity Disorder Sourcebook (Sourcebooks)
Multiple Personality Disorder from the Inside Out
Clinical Perspectives on Multiple Personality Disorder

I just wondered whether (if anyone has read these textbooks) they are any good for what i want to study and find out?

Thaanks! :)
Answer :
I m afraid you ve chosen a highly controversial subject to study. Although there are reported cases of multiple personality disorder , it s hardly a common or well-respected diagnosis. I m sure there are many theories around on the subject, but they re not well-respected by the scientific community. If you look up the ICD-10 system which is used internationally to classify and diagnose mental illness, you ll not find multiple personality disorder there.

It s of course entirely up to you, but if I were you I d switch the topic of the project. Why not choose a mental illness to study that has plenty of research around it? Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are both relatively common and comparatively well understood, although there is still plenty of research left to be done.

There are plenty of sources of information relating to bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. The clinical guidance is useful for finding out about the treatments used in clinical practise; this can be found for free on the NICE website. They should cite a number of reliable, peer-reviewed journal articles studying the causes, treatments and thrapies used. Many of these are available, at least as summaries, via Google Scholar.

You could buy a textbook too, if you wanted to pay - there are many general psychiatry textbooks with chapters on each, but a more specific one might be better for you. I m not sure what you have available, but if you live near a city with a medical school you can go to a nearby bookshop and browse their psych section to see which is most suitable.

Good luck, I hope it goes well
Question :
Treatment for multiple personality disorder?
I ve been diagnosed by someone outwith the conventional medical fields of having MPO, apparently I am 4 in 1 or 1 in 4 I suppose depending on your viewpoint. I was wondering if there was a treatment for this I could take without going in and bothering my GP. I have no recollection of what I do when one of the other personalities takes over.

Is it normal not to remember this kind of thing? I must admit the diagnosis is very plausible - at least to the one making that diagnosis - but if I were then surely I would remember something. There should some evidence. The only thing I can think of is that my bunch of keys keeps moving and when in this personality they are never where I left them. Could my corporeal body is going for drives and I don t know it?
Answer :
WOW!! First, I would not self-diagnose something of this magnitude. Yes, there would be other symptoms beyond missing keys. There would be lost time, unusual injuries, and the people who you interact with every day would tell you some WHOPPER stories. There are a few symptoms you can see for yourself . . . many people with this disorder also have slow reaction time (aka poor coordination). Personal hygiene is also seen an unimportant.
The good news: There is a lot of research into natural cures for this and these suggestions will not hurt you should it be found to not be personality disorder. . .

First, some cases can be caused by viral infection.

Find the essential oils of Clarity and begin inhaling it 4-6 times a day. I would also do the same with Frankincense and peppermint. Next, find someone in your area who does Raindrop therapy and get a treatment once a week.

Above all- Get to a professional if you really think there is something going on, but be careful. A make like this in your mental health record can doom you from government jobs for life!!
Source(s):
I m a Certified Wellness Coach
www.imaginewellnessnow.com