Tucson, AZ (PRWEB) May 09, 2012 Mirasol s new mind, body, and spirit treatment program for teens struggling with eating disorders is small; only ten bed
behavioral therapy , and placebo in generalized social anxiety ...

Tucson, AZ (PRWEB) May 09, 2012
Mirasol's new mind, body, and spirit treatment program for teens struggling with eating disorders is small; only ten beds. Mirasol founder Jeanne Rust, PhD, LPC is focused on the progressive eating disorder treatment center to tailor its recovery processes to individual client needs. The multidisciplinary integrative treatment for adolescent girls and boys is a safe haven for the young people who suffer from extensive peer pressure and chronic stress with trauma, which often results in Anorexia, Bulimia and compulsive eating.
At Mirasol Adolescent Eating Disorder Treatment Center, each teen receives a thorough medical, emotional, psychiatric, educational, developmental, nutritional and social assessment by licensed and professional clinicians. The staff subsequently develops a treatment plan for each individual child with a focus on the presenting issues. The recommended length of visit to the residential eating disorder treatment center varies with each child and all progress is monitored weekly. New goals are set and assessed where registered nurses, psychiatrists, and physicians provide 24/7 monitoring of the child's care. (I took out naturopathic because naturopaths in the state of AZ are licensed as regular docs).
The Mirasol staff works closely with the families and primary caregivers to assist the teens in integrating the new behaviors and skills into their daily life. They gain confidence, learn personal responsibility and recover from their eating disorder behaviors, to eventually make a smooth transition home with an intensive aftercare plan in place.
Mirasol's Focused Continuing-Care Aftercare is implemented for one year after treatment. While in treatment the girls receive at least 2-3 sessions of individual psychotherapy weekly, depending upon their needs. The girls also participate in group therapy that includes:
Cognitive Content-Specicity For Anxiety And Depression: A
University Of Wales Bangor How to control anxiety
unfortunately this is duplicated for children s and teen magazines
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/magazines-lie-while-teens-discover-truthful-answers-to-eating-disorders-and-treatment
Related video about Magazines Lie While Teens Discover Truthful Answers To Eating Disorders And Treatment
Brothers and Sisters - Separation Anxiety
Brothers and Sisters - Separation Anxiety Robert and Kitty make a life-altering decision Magazines Lie While Teens Discover Truthful Answers To Eating Disorders And Treatment