by kim.rossi No one likes to think that they will put their loved one in a nursing home one day. Unfortunately, most Alzheimer s patients eventually
Finding The Best Alzheimers Care Low Fat Diet Plan

by kim.rossi
No one likes to think that they will put their loved one in a nursing home one day. Unfortunately, most Alzheimer's patients eventually will need to be placed in an Alzheimer's care facility. Because Alzheimer's disease robs a person of his or her ability to handle everyday activities, often families will find they cannot care for their loved one at home. It is usually during the later stages of the disease when patients lose their ability to handle dress themselves, feed themselves and need help going to the bathroom that an Alzheimer's care facility is considered by families.
Once your loved one is diagnosed with Alzheimer's, you should begin planning their move into an Alzheimer's care facility. There are several things to know when looking at an Alzheimer's care facility. You should know how they care for Alzheimer's patients and how much experience they have had in dealing with patients suffering from the disease. Do they separate Alzheimer's patients from the rest of the population?
Some Alzheimer's care facilities specialize in treating Alzheimer's patients. What are the advantages of this type of Alzheimer's care facility over a more traditional nursing home or assisted living facility?
You should anticipate how you will pay for the Alzheimer's care facility. Some long-term insurance polices will cover a stay in an Alzheimer's care facility. Some private insurance companies may cover this expense as well. Many people have set aside funds should they need long-term care and that money is available for the family's to pay for the Alzheimer's care facility.
There are several types of Alzheimer's care facilities. You and your loved one's physician can discuss which Alzheimer's care facility will best suit the needs of the Alzheimer's patient.
Assisted living facilities provide housing, meals, health care and support for Alzheimer's patients. This type of Alzheimer's care facility is also called board and care, adult living and supported care. Many Alzheimer's patients live in this type of Alzheimer's care facility after moving out of their home. This type of Alzheimer's care facility is often a suitable alternative to a nursing home for Alzheimer's patients who can still perform some day to day activities. An assisted living facility is not regulated by the federal government.
Alzheimer's (Alzheimers) Long-Term Care Facilities and Home Care ...
Find Alzheimer's Care In California!
Alzheimers Disease (AD) Grand Rapids Alternative Care
... Keruve GPS Wristwatch will help American families in Alzheimers care
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/finding-the-right-alzheimers-care-facility-for-your-loved-one
Related video about Finding The Right Alzheimer's Care Facility For Your Loved One
Advisory Council on Alzheimers July Meeting Research Sub-Committee
Advisory Council on Alzheimers July Meeting Research Sub-Committee The Research Sub-Committee of the Advisory Council on Alzheimers met on July 23 2012 and presented their recommendations on the National Finding The Right Alzheimer's Care Facility For Your Loved One
Commonly question about Finding The Right Alzheimer's Care Facility For Your Loved One
Question :
Help finding ID for an elderly Alzheimer s family member?
My grampap has moderate-severe Alzheimer s, and is going downhill... We know eventually we ll need to find a nursing home, but for right now, my gramma is taking care of him. He only recently (only today actually) forgot his name... but we need to get him an ID bracelet or some sort of ID, so if he does wander he ll be known who he is... We d like something we can put on and he can t take off...
Answer :
Newest technologies made revolutionary products for people with Alzheimer s: gps bracelets or even implant chips that always can inform monitoring center about where the person is. These products are protecting patients from wondering. Here is more information for you: Alzheimer s: http://www.choiceeldercare.org/articles/
Source(s):
http://www.choiceeldercare.org/
Question :
How can I convince my 69yr old Mom that she can t care for her 86yr old Mother w/ Alzheimer s anymore?
My Mother, 69, who has health and pain problems of her own is trying to not only care for my Grandma, 86 with Alzheimer s, but also my Aunt, her Sister, who lives with my Grandma and is disabled to the point of being on a walker, not able to use her hands, and both of them fall all the time. I have begged her to consider an assisted living facility they can both stay in the same room/apt NOW before it gets any worse than what it is; my Grandma is paranoid, has tried to leave the house in the middle of the night, in the foreseeable future I believe she will become violent and my Aunt can not walk without her walker, her hands are curled in so she can t cook or even bathe herself correctly. Mom is out there staying about 3 nights a week when both my Aunt and Grandma need 24/7 care now; not later.
My Mother is only harming herself by trying to over do it in caring for two women who can no longer care for themselves.
There is even a problem with it being sanitary there as they both have diarrhea and the housekeeper and my Mom find feces all over the house and bathroom every single day.
This is more than my Mom can handle and I don t know how to get her to understand that she is not failing her Mother who had a TIA stroke and then went into this dementia immediately afterward. It has gotten out of hand and I don t want MY Mother to die from trying to care for her own Mother who can t say that she would rather be in a nursing home (as if she were in her right mind, she would ve said this) and also her Sister who won t even do physical therapy to try and get better. The injuries they sustain from falling alone are beyond Mom s ability to care for them.
Any advice from people who have gone through this?
Answer :
I wonder if your mother feels guilty and feels she is obligated to take care of them???? You should ask her why she is doing this, if she KNOWS she has problems of her own. I would talk to her and encourage her to at least look at facilities. She will find that they are qualified and prepared to take care of your relatives. Your mother does NOT need to take on this added burden and everyone will be much happier if they get the support they need in an assisted facility. She can visit anytime and she can have peace of mind at the same time.
Question :
Alzheimer s/Blood Pressure/Trazepam?
My Mom is in the last stages of Alzheimers in a lockdown memory care facility. Yesterday, I went to visit her and got there right after dinner. The CNA s told me she was watching TV. I went back and found her bent over with her head nearly between her legs and passed out. We tried waking her but the most we could get from her is a blank stare. She recognized no one. Her temp and BP were taken. Temp was normal and BP was high for her; 140/89. She has a strict schedule for HBP meds.

CNA s told me she had eaten well (common, though I know she only picks at food: I ve watched many times without her knowing I was there.) She had been up and walking around before dinner and "helping" with the patients. This is only what I was told.

So here is my first question.

What would cause her BP to be so high if she was passed out and there was no fever and meds are taken VERY regularly?

I got her dressed for bed, changed her diaper and had everyone tell her good night even though it was 7:00 p.m. My son, 11 yr old nephew and 13 yr old niece told me "Grandmas dying!" My brother just didn t know what to think and kept asking me questions.

Oh, one other thing. Hospice put mom on or Trazepam about a month or two ago for sleep problems. Could that have anything to do with it?

I talked with the facility and mom is back up and has no recollection of last night (normal). BP is still high but she is now acknowledging when spoken to though her answers make no sense (normal). Could her HBP meds just not be effective any more or the Trazepam is interfering with them?

Thanks a million.

Caring for mother with Alzheimers
IMO -- The best thing I ve found out about Alzheimer s is there is never a re-run on TV!!
Answer :
I can see you love your mother very much. Let me assure you that your mother s BP is high, but acceptable. Besides, at the last stage of Alzheimer she may be a bit rigid when BP was measured, which would in turn give her an overestimated BP reading. Changing BP medicine now may not help her BP. And the possible side effect of the new BP medicine and its interaction with her concurrent medications may cause even more problems. I think at this stage, you should try to make your mother happy and comfortable, this BP level is not going to give much problem indeed. God bless you and your mother.