Westport, CT (PRWEB) April 19, 2012 Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc. (SKLD), the Westport, CT-based nonprofit organization, announces two fre
... Youth Achievement Award, Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc
Westport, CT (PRWEB) April 19, 2012
Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc. (SKLD), the Westport, CT-based nonprofit organization, announces two free programs. Dr. Alan Wachtel, recognized as one of the nations top psychiatrists in pharmacology for mood and attention disorders, will discuss The Impact of Mood, Anxiety, and Depression on Learning and Attention on April 25, 2012, at Temple Sholom in Greenwich, CT from 7:00 to 9:00 pm. Dr. Julia A. Trebing, an expert in child psychotherapy and play therapy who lectures nationwide, will speak on The Heart and Science of Positive Parenting at the New Canaan Public Library in New Canaan, CT from 7:00 to 8:30 pm on April 30, 2012.
Research has shown that fostering a childs focus and executive functioning skills helps maximize the ability to learn. In addition, many children with LD experience anxiety and depression, further affecting learning and focus. Alan Wachtel, M.D., founder and director of Familyhealth Associates in New York City and White Plains, NY will discuss new advances in the treatment of attention and mood disorders, including the integration of behavioral strategies and pharmacological approaches. He will also address the benefits and risks of various treatments, and how to decide when to initiate treatment.
Two articles based on Dr. Wachtels October 2011 presentation for SKLD are available on the SKLD website."Is ADHD the Only Problem Your Child Faces" states that ADHD affects 9.5% of American children, and that "the diagnostic core of the disorder is not hyperactivity, as people generally believe, but inattention, poor executive functioning, and an inability to stay on task."
Alan B. Wachtel, M.D. is a board certified psychiatrist and director of Familyhealth Associates, a multi-disciplinary private group practice specializing in the diagnosis and treatment of attention, behavior, learning, and mood disorders. He is a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at New York University School of Medicine, and a Distinguished Life Fellow of the American Psychiatric Association.
Dr. Wachtel has been certified by the Consumers' Research Council of America as one of America's Top Psychiatrists in the area of pharmacology of mood and attention disorders. He is the author of The Attention Deficit Answer Book.
... Copyright 2005 by Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc
Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc.
... winners smart kids with learning disabilities inc skld is pleased
SMART KIDS WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES logo
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/smart-kids-with-learning-disabilities-inc-sponsors-free-programs-by-adhd-expert-dr-alan-wachtel-and-noted-psychologist-dr-julia-trebing
Related video about Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc. Sponsors Free Programs by ADHD Expert Dr. Alan Wachtel and Noted Psychologist Dr. Julia Trebing
Flummox and Friends A Smart Quirky Show for Smart Quirky Kids
Flummox and Friends A Smart Quirky Show for Smart Quirky Kids Were making a smart quirky show for smart quirky kids And we need your help Flummox and Friends is an offbeat live-action comedy Smart Kids with Learning Disabilities, Inc. Sponsors Free Programs by ADHD Expert Dr. Alan Wachtel and Noted Psychologist Dr. Julia Trebing