by FreeBirD Depression is a mental state that can impact your body mood and thoughts. Left to its own, depression can work its way into every a
stress lift from my shoulders. As a result, the quality of my life ...

by FreeBirD
Depression is a mental state that can impact your body mood and thoughts. Left to its own, depression can work its way into every aspect of your life. Make no mistake, a depressive disorder is not something to take lightly or ignore. It's real, and although sometimes difficult to accurately diagnose, is a condition that needs to be treated.
Unlike many illnesses, depression simply cannot be treated by telling someone to buck up and pull themselves together. Nor can depression be treated with medication alone. Depression can interfere with almost every aspect of your life, including work, family relationships, sleeping, eating, hobbies, and anything else that at one time was found enjoyable.
Depression Symptoms
While not a comprehensive list of symptoms, the following are very common with the illness.
1.An Almost Unrelenting Feeling of Sadness or Emptiness
2.Feelings of Hopelessness and a General Pessimistic Outlook
3.Loss of Interest in Once Enjoyed Activities and Hobbies
4.Fatigue or Constant State of Being Tired
5.Restlessness and Irritability
While women are typically diagnosed with depression at a two to one ratio to men, this probably doesn't tell the whole story. Men are much more willing to think they can "tough it out" especially when dealing with an emotional illness such as depression. Men also exhibit additional symptoms that may suggest depression.
These symptoms may include out of character anger and frustration or violent behavior, isolation from family and friends along with alcohol or substance abuse. The Mayo Clinic has suggested that job stress is a common cause of male depression.
Here are a few of the most common issues with today's work environment
1. Unreasonable Demands
Prevent Hair Loss By Reducing Stress In Your Life
feeling worried or nervous is a normal part of everyday life everyone ...
anxiety
about finishing everything before summer. Some mothers are feeling ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/feeling-uninterested-in-your-life-it-may-be-the-depression-talking
Related video about Feeling Uninterested in Your Life - It May Be the Depression Talking
What Are You Worth Getting Past Status Anxiety
What Are You Worth Getting Past Status Anxiety Writer Alain De Botton says that status anxiety is more pernicious and destructive than most of us can imagine and recommends getting out of the Feeling Uninterested in Your Life - It May Be the Depression Talking
Commonly question about Feeling Uninterested in Your Life - It May Be the Depression Talking
Question :
Lose in life (may be because i m studying that something i don t want to)?
I guess i m lose in my life.
I am not interested in everything including games, and i am not interested in mixing with people.
But i have to study, because study in college is my parents hope. I have a duty to accomplish it. But i feel lonely when i am alone, i feel i need to do something but i don t have motivation to do so. Recently, my mum said i should take Master Classes. And i don t know what is the goal of going for Master.

My parents goal is Master in Financial Engineering. And my own goal is to be an entrepreneur. But entrepreneur can t be hired by anyone but yourself. So that s why i am stuck and im forced to study Finance and even Financial Engineering for Master.

Is it the life is all about the lucrative salary or slave of working with someone. They said if you are working with someone you can enjoy your life. But if you open the business by yourself, you will have no time to enjoy but always working on it. Which one is better?

In the end, i really want to start a business or even want to invest in stock, but my capital is tied to my parents.

by the way i am a chinese student in US. What should i do if im going to entrepreneur? I think why am i feel uninterested in life because im studying for something i don t like, do you think so?
Answer :
if you keep going this way being unsocial and doing what everyone wants you to but you and making everyone happy except yourself then you will never feel any happiness in life. it s time you do something for yourself. of course school is important but you cannot just sit there studying 24-7. you need to get out and meet people. also if you really want to be an entrepreneur then maybe you should just change majors. even though your parents may be upset for a while atleast you will be happy and can prove to them that you can be a success at it. because there is nothing worse than waking up every morning going to a job that you hate. maybe there is a way you can incorporate what you want to do and what your parents want you to do. so that you can have both. or you could maybe take online courses later on to help you become an entreprneur. but having a finance degree is a pretty big help.

good luck. remember that your happiness comes first.
Question :
Just need some opinions...Idk. Sometimes I feel like i may be asking too much out of life. What would you do?
Here s my situation...
I am in my 2nd marriage and not sure how long I want to continue with it. I feel exhausted like maybe I m not cut out to be married cause this is stressing me out constantly, idk. My husband acts like I ask too much. Its like a mind game. He ignores most of what I say, I have to work hard to regain his attention in the middle of a conversation all the time. He will sit beside me and not even talk, but then call someone up on the phone. Its not that I m nagging or trying to argue either. I will try to ask and talk about just how his day went or something like that. I will try to talk about what happened at home or in my day at work and he blocks me out or loses interest in mid sentence. He has even told me that he works and brings home the money and that he doesnt want to hear about what happened at home during the day that it is my job and he dont want to deal with it. Even if it has to do with his daughter ( my step-daughter). This makes me feel like he s uninterested in me. He also does not take up for me when his daughter s grandmother (his ex inlaws) and aunt talk about me like I m trash. They have no reason other than to start drama, which is normal for ex inlaws, but he avoids talking to them all together and/or does nothing when they are disrespectful to me. When I tell him that I miss acting like a couple and spending time together he acts like I m nagging him and says I cant have it all. I dont ask for much, I dont know what to do about it. He comes home 1/2 drunk at least 2 days out of the week from work. And if hes mean to me when hes drunk, the next day he says I need not to pay any attention to how he treated me because he was lit and dont know what he was doing. That he only does it every once in a while. I dont think that should be acceptable honestly. It still hurts. When we argue, he will be extremely irritated and literally 30 seconds later, without any resolution but me just giving up and shutting up because of frustration, he acts like nothing ever happened. I dont want to drag stuff out and hold a grudge, thats not the way I am, but thats just bizarre to me. its like total denial or avoidance or idk, somethin...ahhh! We have a lot of tension going on and he denies we even have any problems when I try to confront him about it. I dont know what to do. Am I asking too much? I go along and pretend things are ok because there are kids in the house and I dont like arguing. But I stay restless inside and keep an unsettled feeling because I long to have a healthy relationship where both value each other and are interested in each othrs day or whatever. He confuses me so bad cause in one sense he ignores me, then he will kiss me and tell me he loves me. So long as I keep my opinions to myself and go through every day at the house taking care of the kids and the home and whatever he needs and never go against what he says and never get upset when he drinks so much and never ask when hes going to spend time with me hes fine.He thinks I have no reason to be feeling the way I do. He says that the bills are paid and he comes home every evening so I should chill out. That if only I would chill out everything would be fine. The funny thing is, I do chill out. I dont nag, I take care of everyone here and the home. I hardly ever express my frustration to him, but when I do he says I constantly nag. Really? This just makes me shake my head...its so confusing. I dont see where everything is so normal and ok. Please tell me if I m wrong, but isnt the main reason people get married for to have a companion in life to share life with them? Is it somethin we are just suppose to grin and bear? I feel so unsettled and lonely and sometimes just wish I was by myself with my kids. That way I wouldnt have to worry about begging someone to want to spend time with me or if they were going to come home 1/2 drunk...etc...ugh:(
To add a little detail about my situation...We have no kids together and it would take me a little while to save money if we were to split up. I have nowhere to go.
Answer :
I am on my second marriage also, 21 yrs together. He doesn t come home lit or anything like that, but he has like tunnel vision and really isn t interested in me or my day. I ask him about his and he only asks about mine if I nag! I stay because the economy is bad and at the age of 51, I probably wouldn t find another very quickly or make enough to even live decently by myself. So I can tell you what he is now is what he is, mine hasn t changed no matter how much we discuss the problem or I ***** or nag! He is SELFISH and I guess will always be that way, so weight your options carefully. If I knew then what I know now I would have left 20yrs ago.....I would run for the hills as fast as I could! Start saving that money and even if you decide to stay, having a little nest egg will make you feel more in control of the situation and that you are not stuck in a marriage because of money issues!
Source(s):
my marriage
Question :
I think I may need a therapist.?
I believe that I have depression but I have never really got it confirmed (don t actually know how). I have had it for a while but never really payed that mush attention to it. I ve talked to my doctor about it before and she put me on some antidepressant to see if it would help, but it made me feel worse and i went off of it after a month or less. I haven t tried anything else since then she has suggested a therapist a few different times, but I declined and said I would try to deal with it on my own.
Well up until now that seems like it has been working fine. More recently I have been doing things a little differently, I started smoking Swishers and Black and Milds probably two to three months ago, only once a week. I don t know if this has much to do with it but maybe.
Anyways more to the point, more recently I have been feeling more down about life and everything in general. I ve been feeling more and more tired everyday and been having trouble getting up and out of bed in the morning (this is the usual though, although has been getting progressively worse). I have been able to sleep at night (like now), and just over all feel kind of empty.
I ve been scared to do things that may hurt, and have been feeling uninterested in thing that I used to love that would make me happy. I feel kind or bored with life. I find myself asking myself "is it right to feel like this" or "does everyone feel different." I don t know what to do because overall i can t seem to make myself feel that happy. I have a home to live, a beautiful girlfriend who I love and I know loves me, my parents are great and care about me and I have no reason to be down on life, but I just can t help but wonder if I need to go to a therapist.
Basically what my question is, is after reading this I am just wondering if maybe this is normal behavior for a 20 year old, or should I seek professional help?
I also had one other question that ties in with this, I have recently just been thinking about if I were to die weather or not it would make that much of a difference, not that I would kill myself, but just if something happened. I don t know why I have started to wonder this more recently, and it worries me. I m not the type of person who would kill themself, I think it s stupid and sad that they can t figure out a different way to continue on with life. But my second question is this, is thinking about my own death and how it would effect anything a thought that could be considered a thought of suicide or is it something normal?
Answer :
I understand what you are going through. I have had the same feelings throughout my life. I m 46 now and still have those feelings but never seeked help. I have diagnosed myself with having dysthymia. My best advice to you is to get professional help. Make sure you get someone that can really help you and understands your issue(s). Be picky about who you get to help you. In the mean time, I would try to heal myself from the inside out. DRUGS DON T HELP! Pay attention to your diet and what you ingest into your body. The chemicals in our food today affect you more than you think. Think of it this way, if you put bad fuel in a car it will run like crap. The same thing with your body. I have started eating more organic food and cutting out anything that contains chemicals. I feel a lot better just by eating better. I would also try to reduce my stress. Good luck my friend.