Toronto, ON (PRWEB) June 30, 2012 Bel Marra Health, well known for offering high-quality, specially formulated vitamins and nutritional supplements, sup
Bel Marra Health Supports Recent Research That Shows How Eating ...

Toronto, ON (PRWEB) June 30, 2012
Bel Marra Health, well known for offering high-quality, specially formulated vitamins and nutritional supplements, supports recent research that shows the tie between consumption of caffeine and Alzheimers disease.
A new study published in the Journal of Alzheimers disease (June 5th, 2012), has discovered that a high daily intake of caffeine could lead to some promising results.
New diagnostic guidelines allow doctors to identify Alzheimers disease in its earlier stages before it completely develops. It is estimated that 10 million Americans fall into one of the three pre- Alzheimers stages and this number is on the rise. Mild cognitive impairment, or MCI, is one of the pre- Alzheimers stages and it is used to describe patients who have some Alzheimers pathology in their brains, who experience a degree of short-term memory loss and who are likely to develop dementia within three years. The study was conducted by researchers from the University of Miami and the University of South Florida and it included 124 MCI participants over the age of 65, from Tampa and Miami.
The researchers measured blood caffeine levels of the participants at the onset of the study, and then measured them again at a two-to-four year follow up session. The researchers found that the participants with mild cognitive impairment who progressed to dementia by the time of the follow-up had significantly lower (51 percent less) blood caffeine levels than those participants whose MCI remained stable. In fact, not one of the MCI participants who developed Alzheimers had caffeine levels above the critical level of 1200 ng/ml. In contrast, We found that 100 percent of the MCI patients with plasma caffeine levels above the critical level (indicative of the consumption of several cups of coffee prior to the blood test) experienced no conversion to Alzheimers disease during the two-to-four year follow-up period, said study co-author Dr. Gary Arendash.
CEO of Bel Marra Health Jim Chiang mentioned that, It should be noted that coffee appeared to be the primary if not only source of caffeine for the study participants, and other caffeinated beverages may not produce the same dementia preventing effects.
Bel Marra Health Supports A Recent Study That Outlines How Overweight ...
Bel Marra Health supports recent research that shows promise in the ...
Bel Marra Health Supports Recent Research That Shows How It Is Never ...
Bel Marra Health Supports Recent Research That Shows How Eating ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/bel-marra-health-supports-recent-research-that-shows-the-tie-between-consumption-of-caffeine-and-alzheimers-disease
Related video about Bel Marra Health Supports Recent Research that Shows the Tie Between Consumption of Caffeine and Alzheimers Disease
Election Debate with President Clinton and Robert Dole in Hartford Connecticut 1996
Election Debate with President Clinton and Robert Dole in Hartford Connecticut 1996 Jimmy Griffin former Mayor of Buffalo New York mounted a brief campaign but withdrew after a poor showing in the New Hampshire primary Bel Marra Health Supports Recent Research that Shows the Tie Between Consumption of Caffeine and Alzheimers Disease