San Diego, CA (Vocus/PRWEB) February 23, 2011 When dealing with our sons or daughters disruptive behaviors such as tantrums, arguments, anger, etc. that
Sunset Bay Academy Explains How Teen Oppositional Defiant Behavior ...

San Diego, CA (Vocus/PRWEB) February 23, 2011
When dealing with our sons or daughters disruptive behaviors such as tantrums, arguments, anger, etc. that are causing family unrest on regular occurrences, Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) may be the reason, that is causing these types of conduct in youngsters.
Most teens have their complicated moments where they get moody, argumentative and overall challenging, but as parents we must pay close attention and learn to discern between a moment or if it has become a behavior that occurs on a regular basis; particularly if this is not only towards us, as their parents, but also towards other authority figures.
One can wonder, what is ODD besides behavior issues? What causes ODD? What are the risk factors of ODD? How can it be diagnosed? How is ODD treated?
The symptoms related to ODD are hard to tell apart from normal behavior, especially if we are dealing with a teenager and more so if they come from an emotional or determined personality. ODD is a developmental disorder marked by defiant, hostile, and negative behavior, but without the serious antisocial characteristics observed in conduct disorder. In actual fact, some symptoms of ODD are very similar to behaviors expected during adolescence, but when this type of conduct in a teenager becomes an everyday struggle to the family, home, and/or school and continues for a period of at least six months, we must consider Oppositional Defiant Disorder.
The symptoms we must reflect on, in regards to Teen ODD are disobedience, resentment and anger towards others, spiteful or vindictive behavior with adults, argumentative with adults, loss of temper, aggressive towards peers, deliberate annoyance of others, blames others for mistakes, difficulty maintaining friendships, easily annoyed, acting irritably, refuses to comply with adult rules and requests, just to mention a few.
Sunset Bay Academy Knows Alcoholism Usually Starts in Teen Years, but ...
Sunset Bay Academy Explains How Teen Oppositional Defiant Behavior ...
Sunset Bay Academy Describes How Teen Bipolar Disorder Can Impact ...
... science science department Shane Dixon stress Suchi Krishnaraj
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/sunset-bay-academy-explains-how-teen-oppositional-defiant-behavior-disrupts-the-peace-of-families
Related video about Sunset Bay Academy Explains How Teen Oppositional Defiant Behavior Disrupts the Peace of Families
Healthy Body Functional Body Hollywood Look Side Effect Healthy Function
Healthy Body Functional Body Hollywood Look Side Effect Healthy Function actually live together However when u love someone bliss can be simply sharing a sunset or watching a movie If you have the main ingredient Sunset Bay Academy Explains How Teen Oppositional Defiant Behavior Disrupts the Peace of Families