iMind & Mood Grammaton Studios iMind & Mood is the easiest tool for assessing and dealing with your mental health concerns. This app is based
... : Mindscape explains life, mind, consciousness and happiness

Grammaton Studios iMind Mood is the easiest tool for assessing and dealing with your mental health concerns. This app is based on 30 years of psychiatric experience from treating thousands of patients. By answering a series of questions, you will receive highly customized feedback to find out: Just how stressed out are you? + How does your stress level change over time? + How well do your stress management strategies work for reducing your stress? How likely are you to have: + Anxiety Disorders (e.g., OCD and Panic) + Depressive and Bipolar Disorders + ADD/ADHD and how severe are they? Highlights + Get individually tailored recommendations on how you can tackle your concerns by yourself and when to seek professional help + Track your progress in professional treatment or through self-help measures + Receive highly customized feedback with deep subcategory analysis (e.g., mood, self-esteem, relationships, quality of life, food weight, alcohol drugs, and more) + Email the results to yourself or your therapist with the click of a button - which enables you to share during future therapist sessions Details + Has stress presented a significant burden in your life? Do you wonder how your stress levels compare with other people? Would you like tips for immediate and easy steps you can take to reduce your daily stress? iMind Mood provides you with extensive stress management feedback, personalized to your situation.+ Does depression run in your family? Have you had a history of depression? Are you wondering if you may be experiencing depression for the first time? iMind Mood will help you determine if depression is impacting your life.+ Do you frequently experience anxiety? Are you unsure of the types of anxiety disorders that exist, but concerned that one may be affecting you? Does social anxiety sound like something you have experienced? iMind Mood will help you understand your anxiety.+ Are you concerned you may have attention deficit disorder (ADD)? Does your attention wander frequently? Have others commented on your ability to focus your attention? iMind Mood provides customized feedback on potential attention deficit disorder (ADD) symptoms and recommendations for next steps.+ Have friends or family suggested you have bipolar disorder? Are you concerned your behavior seems bipolar to you at times? iMind Mood provides extensive details on bipolar disorder and tips to improve your quality of life.+ Would you like to better understand your mental health? Tracking your mental health with iMind Mood is as easy as answering nine mental health questions - and the more you answer, the better mental health feedback you get. You can even monitor your mental health over time through the automated quiz history the app provides you. Optionally email yourself your mental health assessment to share with a therapist or psychiatrist if you would like.
Eliminate Anxiety Through Mind Control
The Mind/Mood Pill Book: The Illustrated Guide to the Most-Prescribed ...
THE CONCURRENT VALIDITY OF THE MIND OVER MOOD ANXIETY INVENTORY ...
anxiety mood and cognition happiness is about achieving guu objectives
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/imind-mood
Related video about iMind & Mood
How to embed video into Google Sites
How to embed video into Google Sites This video by David Toccafondi will walk you through the process of embedding a video file into Google Sites penn librarieswic pennwic iMind & Mood