MOUNT LAUREL, NJ (PRWEB) January 17, 2012 Robard Corporations 4th Annual Continuing Education (CME/CEU) Conference, The Science and Business of Weight M
Weight Loss Surgery Conference Focuses on Education, Renewal

MOUNT LAUREL, NJ (PRWEB) January 17, 2012
Robard Corporations 4th Annual Continuing Education (CME/CEU) Conference, The Science and Business of Weight Management for the New or Experienced Practitioner, will begin on July 19, 2012, in Philadelphia, and will focus on the operational and treatment skills, techniques, and strategies healthcare professionals need to successfully open a new weight loss facility or enhance a current weight management program.
Healthcare professionals are in a unique position to improve the quality of life for individuals who are obese and overweight. As the obesity epidemic progresses, healthcare professionals should look toward educational forums to learn about the latest research advances, operational and treatment skills, techniques and strategies needed to successfully open a new weight management facility or enhance an existing program. To that end, Robard Corporation, through its Annual Continuing Education (CME/CEU) Conference, is pushing for education and providing an opportunity for networking and the exchange of essential knowledge.
One of the featured speakers at the event, Thomas A. Wadden, PhD, is Professor of Psychology in Psychiatry at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and Director of the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders. At this years conference, Dr. Wadden will discuss Improving Treatment Adherence and Retention while leveraging his extensive research and experience to educate professionals on treating patients and combating obesity.
Dr. Waddens principal research is on the treatment of obesity by methods that have included lifestyle modification, physical activity, very-low-calorie diets, medication, and surgery. He also has investigated the metabolic and behavioral consequences of obesity and weight loss. He has published over 300 scientific papers and book chapters, and co-edited six books, the most recent of which is "Obesity and Its Associated Eating Disorders: A Guide for Mental Health Practitioners" (with Terrence Wilson, Albert Stunkard and Robert Berkowitz). His research has been supported for more than 28 years by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Dr. Wadden is also an associate editor of "Obesity," published by The Obesity Society, of which he is a past president.
Obesity is an epidemic of mounting proportions. The World Health Organization reports that, Globally, there are more than 1 billion overweight adults, at least 300 million of them clinically obese. As a nation, we are on a mission to combat obesity. The emergence of the NFLs Play 60 program and First Lady Michelle Obamas Lets Move campaign have made headlines by focusing on giving parents the tools they need to keep their families healthy, helping individuals to identify manageable choices to fit their schedules, and by making healthy choices an affordable option for all.
Education Pediatric Center of Excellence (COE) Annual Conference ...
Lighten Up Expo Weight Loss Bariatric Surgery Get Fit Charlie ...
2012 Annual Conference: The Science and Business of Weight Management
Annual Conference to Educate New or Experienced Practitioners on the ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health/annual-conference-to-educate-the-weight-loss-industry-on-the-science-and-business-of-tackling-the-obesity-epidemic
Related video about Annual Conference to Educate the Weight Loss Industry on the Science and Business of Tackling the Obesity Epidemic
Davos Annual Meeting 2010 - A Roadmap for a Sustainable Recovery
Davos Annual Meeting 2010 - A Roadmap for a Sustainable Recovery weforum-org 31 01 2010 The Annual Meeting Co-Chairs examine what industry and government should do to lead the global economy on a path of Annual Conference to Educate the Weight Loss Industry on the Science and Business of Tackling the Obesity Epidemic