Psych Drugs Michael QuachWant to learn about psychotropic medications quickly and easily? Then check out this free app!With Psych Drugs, you can le
Overcoming Anxiety with Psychiatric Help

Michael QuachWant to learn about psychotropic medications quickly and easily? Then check out this free app!With Psych Drugs, you can learn important and useful information about various psychotropic medications such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, and anti-anxiety medications. Some major classes of psych drugs include: SSRIs, TCAs, MAOIs, second generation (atypical) antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, and meds for insomnia, anxiety, depression, ADHD, alcohol dependence, opioid dependence and nicotine addiction, etcFor each medication, you will find: Generic name Brand name Class Indications Dosage forms Maximum daily dose for adults Maximum daily dose for children Half-life Side effectsThis useful app is ideal for medical and mental health professionals, psychiatric residents, medical students, psychology students, therapists, counselors, and of course curious lay people who just want to familiarize themselves with psychotropic medications.App Features: Scroll alphabetically or use the A-Z side panel. Find a drug quickly via search bar function. Tap on the drug to learn about it. Save your favorites with a touch of a button. Share drug info with a friend via email.Great reviews by our loyal users: "Was a good, informative, useful app for mental health workers. Since update...Now it is excellent!" "Best ever! This app opened my eyes to more things!" "Awesome! Love this app!" "Really neat app for people taking psych meds and going into the medical field." "I work in mental health and it's so easy to just slide through an alphabetical list and get a quick and dirty run down on the med. Great app!"Legal disclaimer: Please understand that the intended use of this application is as an educational aid and does not cover all possible uses, actions, precautions, side effects, or interactions of any of these medications. This information is not intended as medical advice for individual problems or for making an evaluation as to the risks and benefits of taking a particular medication. The information here should not be used as a substitute for a consultation or visit with your psychiatrist, family physician or other health care provider. You should consult with a licensed physician for answers to any questions you may have about these or other medications. This application provides the information content on an 'as is' and 'as available' basis. No warranty is expressed or implied that this application is a comprehensive source of information on any topic of health or otherwise. In no event shall the creator of this application be liable in any manner for any direct, incidental, consequential, indirect or punitive damages arising out of your access, use or inability to use this application, or any errors or omissions in the information on this application. This application reserves the right at any time and from time to time to add, change, modify, update, or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this application (or any part thereof) with or without notice. This application shall not be liable to you or to any third party for any addition, modification, suspension or discontinuance of this application.
... for antipsychotic and anti anxiety drugs in the two years the
Anti-Anxiety Drugs
Psychoactive Drug Film DVD: 1957 Atarax For Anxiety Psychiatric ...
Anxiety Drug List
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/substance-related-disorders/psych-drugs
Related video about Psych Drugs
CCHR THE STAMP Psychiatric Labels Fuel 80 Billion Drug Industry
CCHR THE STAMP Psychiatric Labels Fuel 80 Billion Drug Industry 120 million people are taking psychiatric drugs- heres why Psychiatric drugs can only be prescribed for a psychiatric LABEL mental Psych Drugs
Commonly question about Psych Drugs
Question :
Chest pain and short of breath after psych drugs?
Two years ago I started taking psych drugs, almost overnight I lost energy, became short of breath, and put on weight (lots of weight) I went from very active to very sick in a short period of time. I m off them now, but still occasionally short of breath etc.Anyone elae get that with psych drugs?
Answer :
I don t take those types of drugs however, I believe you should get checked out by your doctor. Sometimes medications can cause long term effects even after you get off of them. It can also be another medical condition that I think you should really get checked out. Infact, any time you have anything wrong with your breathing you should, especially if you smoke or work in conditions where the air has substance in it that could effect your lungs. You could have a touch of asthma, or food allergy, anxiety attacks, etc. Only your doctor can be able to run the appropriate tests to find out the cause and treat you accordingly.
Question :
Medical doctors, do you agree? Article in JAMA said Psych drugs for kids is mainly a cash cow?
I was reading an article in a JAMA at work that was left by a doctor. It said that most psych drugs are given to kids who don t need them and are only perscribed to make the drug companies money. What do you say?
Answer :
Doctors dont care if the drugs companies make money. They only care if they make money. Prescribing meds doesnt make doctors that much money.
Question :
Are psych drugs just a scam by the pharmacutical industry?
every psych drug I took, has ended up in court for being marketed for things that it cannot treat. yet my psychiatrists keeps prescribing me this garbage that does nothing but make me worse.
Answer :
Yes it is a money scam. Very few of the drugs actually work, and don t cause extended health problems. Some are good, don t get me wrong. But mostly it s all about moneyyy