by Ayurvedic-Medicine Everybody at one point experiences anxiety when faced with a stressful or worrying situation. Anxiety is the feeling of fear,
To Overcome Anxiety - How To Treat Anxiety & Ways To Cure Anxiety ...

by Ayurvedic-Medicine
Everybody at one point experiences anxiety when faced with a stressful or worrying situation. Anxiety is the feeling of fear, apprehension and worry, accompanied by nausea, palpitations, chest pain, and breathlessness. Sometimes this can interfere with your normal life. Excessive anxiety can be linked with other psychiatric conditions, such as depression.
Anxiety can be in many forms. It may be a fear of snakes, a fear of heights or stage fright, or it could also be nonstop worry about your parenting skills or constant fretting about success at work, etc.
Components:
Anxiety is said to have four components:
Cognitive components: This imposes fear of uncertain danger.
Somatic components: When faced with a frightening situation your blood pressure and heart rate are increased, you tend to sweat, and blood flow to the major muscle groups is increased. The somatic signs of anxiety might include pale skin, sweating, trembling, and pupil dilation.
Emotional components: The emotional components of anxiety cause a sense of dread or panic, nausea, and chills.
Behavioral components: This would lead to both voluntary and involuntary behaviors, and you maybe directed at avoiding the source of anxiety which is quite common.
Types of Anxiety and the symptoms:
There are various types of anxiety - Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Post traumatic Stress Disorder, Social Anxiety and specific phobias. Anxiety Disorder is very common throughout the world. It is a chronically recurring case of anxiety that can seriously affect your life. People with this disorder feel afraid of something but are unable to articulate the specific fear. If you are constantly worrying, and have a hard time controlling your worries then you might be suffering from anxiety disorder.
Some of the common symptoms of anxiety disorder are:
o Muscle tension
o Heart palpitations
o Dizziness
o Fatigue
o Shortness of breath
o Sweating
overcome anxiety
How To Overcome Anxiety Test for Anxiety
How to Overcome Writing Anxiety Journalism, English and Writing ...
Overcome Anxiety and Experience Serenity
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/anxiety/overcome-your-anxiety
Related video about Overcome Your Anxiety
How To Overcome Anxiety and Build Will Power
How To Overcome Anxiety and Build Will Power Learn more about Reishi Cordyceps and Mucuna here hyperionherbs-com In this video I share with you a few strategies for overcome anxiety and re Overcome Your Anxiety
Commonly question about Overcome Your Anxiety
Question :
How do you overcome anxiety attacks on amusement park rides?
I want some tips on how to overcome rides at amusement parks. I dont really ride much because I m afraid that I will have an anxiety attack on the ride. I want some tips to deal with it during a ride or how to prevent them. Thanks!
-Please no smart-*** answers. Im in need of help!
Answer :
relax yourself before sit down . here is wat i do i pretend i am in a more dangerous situation like a killer is chacing you through the park and your only hope is to go on the roller coaster anything that is worse than the situation that you are in will work. i have anxiety also this works for me . best of luck
Question :
How can I overcome anxiety of using public bathroom urinals?
I always have to use the stall whenever I go to the bathroom and sometimes people like my dad and my friends think its weird. And whenever I do try to use urinals I get stage fright and I m physically unable to go to the bathroom . Could this be Paruresis or do you think I just like my privacy? How do I overcome this anxiety? Thanks in advance.
Answer :
This is a common problem for many guys, and it was an issue for me for many years. I m mostly over it now. Once I get the flow started, I can pee anywhere. The big deal was relaxing enough to release the stream. A few things that helped: If I m listening to my iPOD, the flow starts easily. If I look straight ahead and not worry about what everyone else in the mens room is doing, the flow starts in a reasonable amount of time. Be patient with yourself. Many times I made myself stand at the urinal until I could get the flow going instead of giving up and heading for the stall - even if it took 20 - 30 seconds.
Question :
I got this cd to help overcome anxiety but do these work?
I got this cd to help overcome and reduce anxiety its like positive affirmations... They say something and your suppose to repeat it out loud to yourself. Like I m a strong and like able person. And you repeat it out loud. It says to listen to it for thirty days and I will get over my anxiety around people. Will this actually work? Is it effective? I m a very negative person will this get rid of this?
Answer :
Yeah they do work, as long as your keep it up and believe in yourself that you will pass and not fail.

Where did you get yours from?

I got mine from Doctor Robert Sharpe from his Life Skills Direct website.
Source(s):
http://www.lifeskillsdirect.com/