Plymouth Meeting, PA (PRWEB) January 15, 2012 Victims of the Penn State/Jerry Sandusky alleged sexual abuse scandal have been offered subsidized therapy
Plymouth Meeting, PA (PRWEB) January 15, 2012
Victims of the Penn State/Jerry Sandusky alleged sexual abuse scandal have been offered subsidized therapy assistance from the Let GoLet Peace Come In Foundation. The foundation is supporting both young men from the grand jury indictment, as well as others who have come forward, with its pioneering efforts to help adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse.
Let GoLet Peace Come In helps and supports adult victims of childhood sexual abuse throughout the world. The foundation is committed to supporting the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and its research toward preventing child sexual abuse and improving treatment for survivors of abuse.
The organization was founded by Peter S. Pelullo, a former executive in the music industry and author of the new book Betrayal and the Beast, which focuses on Mr. Pelullos journey as a survivor of childhood sexual abuse and sexual predation.
A frequent guest expert on the Dr. Drew show, Mr. Pelullo says when he first heard about the Penn State sex abuse scandal he was reminded of his own nightmarish experiences and felt more compelled than ever to make a difference through his philanthropic efforts. He believes trauma therapy is an important step in the healing process.
On the subject of victims of sexual abuse, Mr. Pelullo says: Following my painful journey of recovery from sexual abuse, I decided to create the Let GoLet Peace Come In Foundation. Everyone needs to know sexual abuse is a worldwide pandemic, and I want to reach out and bring to many other men and women the recovery process I experienced.
In his book Mr. Pelullo shares his own childhood sexual abuse story. While he was an executive in the music industry working with the Rolling Stones, Foreigner, Stevie Wonder, and other major artists, he kept hidden and refused to face his own debilitating issues as a survivor of sexual predationthe shame, rage, multiple addictions, depression, and other influences that directly impacted his life. Finally, at the age of fifty-five, Mr. Pelullo confronted the sexual abuse he endured as a child.
With one in three girls and one in four boys being sexually violated before the age of eighteen, its estimated there are tens of millions of adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse in the United States today and hundreds of millions more worldwide. Many experts believe these numbers can be higher since not every case is reported. Many victims stay silent and hide their own sexual abuse because they are afraid or ashamed.
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/mood-disorders/sandusky-accusers-get-foundations-help
Related video about Sandusky Accusers Get Foundations Help
6 Maximilien Robespierre and the French Revolution
6 Maximilien Robespierre and the French Revolution too much unearned property He thought everybody should have enough to get along but that even people who didnt have any property and thus Sandusky Accusers Get Foundations Help