(PRWEB) March 31, 2012 Private tuition provider, Tutors International (http://www.tutors-international.com), today announced the appointment of a Head o
Private Tutor Organisation, Tutors International, Appoints Head Of ...

(PRWEB) March 31, 2012
Private tuition provider, Tutors International (http://www.tutors-international.com), today announced the appointment of a Head of Special Educational Needs, who will provide professional assessment and ongoing support for parents, children and their private tutors.
Sonia Aboagye is a qualified Speech & Language Therapist and dyslexia teacher. Sonia comes to Tutors International from Fairley House School, Londons premier establishment for children with specific learning difficulties (SpLD). Prior to that, she worked in the NHS and at a school for children with ADHD.
This appointment provides Tutors International with the means to have any students developmental progress quickly assessed by a qualified special needs professional, and a plan of action and ongoing support developed between the parents, private tutor and student.
Managing Director and Founder of Tutors International, Adam Caller, said, Im thrilled that Sonia has agreed to join us and that we can continue to enhance the level of care we provide for our clients and their children.
Tutors Internationals existing clients will not be the only ones to benefit from Ms Aboagyes appointment. If a care worker suggests to parents that their child may be experiencing learning difficulties, those parents often panic and dont know where to turn for help, continues Caller. Sonia will be able to carry out an assessment immediately, anywhere in the world. Not only is this a great service for worried parents, who otherwise may wait several weeks for an assessment via the usual channels, but it means she can organise the recruitment of a qualified private tutor that is right for that family, can oversee that tutors work, and can provide specialist advice and regular follow ups.
... person, with excellent organisation and time management skills
Private Tutor Agency, Tutors International, Report Increase In ...
, top tutoring, home tutoring, home tutor, private tutor, private ...
, top tutoring, home tutoring, home tutor, private tutor, private ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/childhood-disorders/private-tutor-organisation-tutors-international-appoints-head-of-special-educational-needs-to-provide-assessment-and-support-to-clients-and-tutors
Related video about Private Tutor Organisation, Tutors International, Appoints Head of Special Educational Needs to Provide Assessment and Support to Clients and Tutors
Built for Success Good Practice in Volunteer Tutor Programs
Built for Success Good Practice in Volunteer Tutor Programs Features four tutoring programs funded by the Corporation for National and Community Service CNCS Explores five key characteristics of good Private Tutor Organisation, Tutors International, Appoints Head of Special Educational Needs to Provide Assessment and Support to Clients and Tutors
Commonly question about Private Tutor Organisation, Tutors International, Appoints Head of Special Educational Needs to Provide Assessment and Support to Clients and Tutors
Question :
Where can I learn conversational Spanish in Dallas, Texas?
I ve been trying to find a community college or international organization in the Dallas, Texas area that offers practical courses in conversational Spanish, but am not having any luck. Does anyone know where I can take a class locally? So far, all I can find are online or software courses and private tutors (which I cannot afford). If I have to, I ll go the online/software route, but I prefer to interact with other people, since it helps me learn much faster. Thanks!
Answer :
get a job as at a restaurant as a cook ! Seriously