Schizophrenia is sometimes called, wrongly, split personality. A question often asked is are there different types of Schizophrenia? Indeed there ar
symptoms can be different depending on the type of schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is sometimes called, wrongly, split personality. A question often asked is are there different types of Schizophrenia? Indeed there are. 5 different types. They are as follows;
1. Disorganized Schizophrenia. Here we find disorganized behaviour and speech. Flat or inappropriate effect is also apparent.
2. Catatonic Schizophrenia. This type of Schizophrenia can make the poor sufferer most unpopular, because one of the symptoms may be repeating what others say or do. I'm sure we've all had the experience of a small child 'aping' us and what we say or the way we move. When an adult starts to do it, it's a great deal worse. They may also suffer difficulty or resistance to moving, excessive or peculiar movements.
3. Paranoid Schizophrenia. Basically, it's very difficult to interact with this person, because they're so involved with various auditory hallucinations.
4. Undifferentiated Schizophrenia. Now, two or more of the following will show that you are likely to be from suffering this type. Hallucinations. Delusions, negative symptoms or catatonic behaviour.
5. Residual Schizophrenia. Here the symptoms just mentioned for other forms of Schizophrenia are absent, although the sufferer still suffers from withdrawals and a decrease in function, together with a reluctance to speak.
It's thought that 1% of the population suffer from this most unpleasant condition generally, which translates into about 2,000,000 people. It's a most complex disorder and even the top psychiatrists don't really know what causes it. My only experience of Schizophrenia was during what turned out to be, most thankfully, my last stay in a psych ward for alcoholism.
Different Types Of Schizophrenia
There are 5 types of schizophrenia classified according to the types ...
Different Types of Schizophrenia
There are many different types of anxiety treatment for children.
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/psychotic-disorders/are-there-different-types-of-schizophrenia
Related video about Are There Different Types Of Schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is a mental disorder that makes it hard to Tell the difference between what is real and not real Think clearly Have Are There Different Types Of Schizophrenia?
Commonly question about Are There Different Types Of Schizophrenia?
Question :
How many different types of Schizophrenia are there?
I d like a name and a little bit description, thank you. Unless there are hundreds. Then don t bother.

Thank you!
Answer :
Look up schizophrenia at mayoclinic.com. Paranoid, hebephrenic, simple, catatonic, undifferentiated, and in remission. Also look up the difference between acute and chronic.
Question :
Are there different types of schizophrenia and if so what are they?
What I mainly want to know is:
is there a schizophrenia where the only symptoms are confused thinking?

Thanks for answering (:
Answer :
Yes! No! Wait, I want to change my mind!
Question :
Are there different types of schizophrenia?
Answer :
yes there are different type of schizophrenia