Erie, PA (PRWEB) June 04, 2012 Child and Family Care provides Erie residents with a full range of confidential and professional services including indiv
Erie, PA Primary Care And Psychological Specialties Merge To Create ...
Erie, PA (PRWEB) June 04, 2012
Child and Family Care provides Erie residents with a full range of confidential and professional services including individual, group, family and marriage counseling, play therapy, neuropsychological evaluations, autism screening, child psychology testing, ADHD treatment, anxiety treatment, and depression treatment. The clinic's carefully chosen team employs a variety of treatment methods to ensure that each client reaches his or her full potential. They allocate advice based on their belief that healthy families and healthy communities create healthy children.
Dr. Douglas Buyer, a licensed psychologist and certified school psychologist, graduated from Brown University, and earned three graduate degrees from the University of Michigan. With 35 years working in a variety of venues including schools and special education, Dr. Buyer brings both knowledge and experience to the team. His specialties include ADHD, leaning disabilities and dyslexia, autism and PDD, anxiety, depression, behavioral and emotional needs, neuropsychological assessment, developmental disabilities, and parenting.
Elizabeth Stroup is a Licensed Clinical Social worker specializing in Autism screening. With seven years of post-graduate experience in the mental health field, she is able to provide both individual and group therapy for children on the Autism spectrum. She also educates and counsels autistic patients' family members.
Kellie Valentine is an LPC who strives to help clients achieve their highest level of emotional well-being through caring, professional and holistic counseling methods. She works with families and individuals facing an array of emotional, psychological and behavioral issues including divorce, personality disorders, trauma, PTSD, OCD, general anxiety, eating disorders, sexual abuse or dysfunction, and depression.
erie pa primary care and psychological specialties merge to create ...
On depression and anxiety in Japanese nursing students: A ...
Air Force Physician Assistant Honored For Advancing Profession, High ...
Psychologist ephrata pa walt wound care protocols in psychiatric ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/eating-disorders/erie-pa-primary-care-and-psychological-specialties-merge-to-create-child-and-family-care
Related video about Erie, PA Primary Care and Psychological Specialties Merge to Create Child and Family Care
Penn State Board of Trustees Meeting - May 4 2012
Penn State Board of Trustees Meeting - May 4 2012 Erie, PA Primary Care and Psychological Specialties Merge to Create Child and Family Care