The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with People with Alzheimer s-Type Dementia ISBN13: 9781878812810Condition: NewNotes:
.com: Validation Breakthrough Simple Techniques for Communicating ...
ISBN13: 9781878812810
Condition: New
Notes: BRAND NEW FROM PUBLISHER! 100% Satisfaction Guarantee. Tracking provided on most orders. Buy with Confidence! Millions of books sold!
This extraordinary book shows caregivers how they can interact successfully with people with dementia by avoiding reality orientation and instead focusing on underlying emotional needs. Based on the principles of Erik Erikson and on subsequent decades of work with disoriented older adults, the simple techniques of Validation are easy to learn, take just minutes a day, and can be used by both family and professional caregivers. Let the powerful techniques of internationally recognized expert Naomi Feil help you reach confused older adults by establishing respectful, loving relationships that break the silence of withdrawal. Discover new ways to meet the challenges of caring for people with dementia! Touching, amusing, and informative, The Validation Breakthrough shows caregivers how to dramatically enhance the quality of their relationships with people in the early to middle stages of dementing illnesses. Helpful, practical strategies will show you how to stop patronizing and arguing with people with dementia and start building trust by stepping into their world. Eighteen poignant case studies illustrate how Validation is used to handle wandering, agitation, and other challenging behaviors-and reduce the sense of anger and frustration in caregivers and clients alike. Essential reading for long-term care staff, gerontologists, social workers, and family members, The Validation Breakthrough is transforming the way caregivers communicate with people with dementia
The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with ...
.com: Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating ...
The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with ...
Communicating with the Dementia or Alzheimers Afflicted by Bob ...
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/cognitive-disorders/the-validation-breakthrough-simple-techniques-for-communicating-with-people-with-alzheimers-type-dementia
Related video about The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with People with 'Alzheimer's-Type Dementia'
SimpleC - Breakthrough Therapies for Dementia
SimpleC - Breakthrough Therapies for Dementia SimpleC and Presbyterian Homes of Georgia present Breakthrough Therapies for Dementia presented at the Aging Service of Georgia Annual Conference The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with People with 'Alzheimer's-Type Dementia'