West Palm Beach, Florida (PRWEB) April 05, 2012 Wellington Retreat, an addiction and psychiatric treatment facility, confidently introduces fitness trai
Luxury Health Spa retreat in Provence Freshadventures.co.uk
West Palm Beach, Florida (PRWEB) April 05, 2012
Wellington Retreat, an addiction and psychiatric treatment facility, confidently introduces fitness trainers for the brain. Perhaps this is a bit of an over simplification of the newest advances in computer technology facilitating the recovery process at The Wellington Retreat, but it serves as a useful model to introduce the role for Neurofeedback in the recovery process.
For years, patients with ADHD (Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder), OCD (Obsessive Compulsive Disorder) and Addiction have suffered the stigma of being undisciplined rather than instilling empathy as patients suffering from a diseased brain. Q-EEG (quantitative electroencephalography) now provides the newest computer technology to paint colored brain maps illustrating the injured areas of the brain which make sustained recovery virtually impossible without quality medical intervention. Comprehending the intricacies of brainwaves is well beyond the grasp most patients, but color pictures of injured brains makes understanding easy. Q-EEG even illustrates the high performance areas of gifted individuals.
Patients are assessed at the Wellington Retreat and need not be transported to special facilities equipped to handle radioactive materials. The Q-EEG studies can easily be repeated and are sensitive enough to monitor the patients progress while in treatment. Not only are the studies important to patients, but the specific findings providing critical insight to guide the physicians in optimizing successful treatment strategies for various diseases in addition to addiction.
At Wellington Retreat, all treatment is based upon evidence based therapies, which are tailored to the individuals specific needs. Specializing in both neuropsychiatry and addictionology, Robert A. Moran, MD, CEO of Wellington Retreat, personally directs each patients care. Dr. Moran believes that daily physician insight is essential to quality medical care because this is not an ethical or discipline problem which will go away by just trying harder. Patients with pure psychiatric diseases enrich the learning process of the mixed patient community. All patients are able to see how their diseased brain limits their recovery to health. They are also able to appreciate how prescription medications (when indicated) make sustained recovery possible.
North Carolina:FREE Travel Magazine E-zine: Dream or Plan your week ...
manicures body wraps waxing from head to toe and tinting
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/depression/fitness-trainers-for-the-brain-at-wellington-retreat
Related video about Fitness Trainers for the Brain at Wellington Retreat
Healthy Body Functional Body Hollywood Look Side Effect Healthy Function
Healthy Body Functional Body Hollywood Look Side Effect Healthy Function different press learn sale around print course job canada process teen room stock training too credit point join science co men categories Fitness Trainers for the Brain at Wellington Retreat