Los Angeles, CA (PRWEB) October 25, 2011 Elements Behavioral Health invites clinicians and treatment professionals to a workshop titled Narcissism Addic
The Rebel Doctor The Fix
Los Angeles, CA (PRWEB) October 25, 2011
Elements Behavioral Health invites clinicians and treatment professionals to a workshop titled Narcissism Addiction and Detachment as Tools to Emotional Survival on Oct. 28, 2011, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., at the Lod Cook Alumni Center at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.
Professionals will join internationally known author, sex addiction specialist and educator Robert Weiss, LCSW, CSAT-S, for lunch and training. The workshop will provide insight into the connection between childhood abuse and adult mental health disorders, and will explore the evolving relationship between addiction and mental health treatment.
Adults who struggle with personality disorders and addictions, whether to sex, drugs, alcohol, gambling or food, often have a history of childhood abuse or neglect, said Mr. Weiss. These early traumatic experiences can lead to dissociation from healthy intimacy and acting out through compulsive or addictive behaviors. By treating the underlying emotional trauma as well as the addictive behaviors, patients can develop the tools they need for recovery in all areas.
Robert Weiss is the founder of The Sexual Recovery Institute, the Director of Sexual Disorders Services for Elements Behavioral Health, and the creator of The Center for Relationship and Sexual Recovery at The Ranch in Tennessee. A media expert to CNN, The Oprah Winfrey Network, ESPN, Dr. Drew and the Today Show, among others, Mr. Weiss also has provided clinical training and program development for the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. military and behavioral treatment centers throughout the United States, Europe and Asia.
Workshop attendees will earn four CEUs. To register for this professional workshop, visit the Elements Behavioral Health events page or call Sherry Young, PhD, at (310) 956-9326.
Source : http://imentalhealth.net/mental-health-disorders/personality-disorders/renowned-sex-addiction-expert-speaks-at-lsu-professional-workshop-on-narcissism-addiction-and-detachment
Related video about Renowned Sex Addiction Expert Speaks at LSU: Professional Workshop on Narcissism Addiction and Detachment
Interventionist Jeff Jay Explains Intervention against Addiction
Interventionist Jeff Jay Explains Intervention against Addiction World renowned Interventionist and Author Jeff Jay was one of the keynote speakers along with his wife Debra Jay at a joint program of Brighton Renowned Sex Addiction Expert Speaks at LSU: Professional Workshop on Narcissism Addiction and Detachment