I even made my own cake!

This is the Masked AMHP’s 100th post!

When I created this blog back in March 2009, I had no idea whether or not I would be able to sustain writing it beyond a few months. Would I run out of things to write about? Would I simply get bored?  Would I be able to keep to my initial remit, which was to inform and entertain? Would anyone actually read the blog?

Well, I’ve now managed to keep thinking of things to write about for over 3 years. And people do seem to read, and even sometimes enjoy, the blog. When Blogger started to provide me with statistics, back in July 2009, I was gratified to discover that around 1400 people were accessing the blog every month. That was nearly 50 people every day! I am now getting around 10,000 page views a month, and the readership seems to be continuing to grow month on month. 

One of the things I love about blogging is the feedback you receive from readers. I’ve had many interesting, thought provoking and encouraging comments, from professionals, other bloggers and, importantly, from many service users. These comments have helped me to think that writing the blog has been worthwhile, and even useful to others. I’d particularly like to mention CB here, who used to write the awesome FightingMonsters blog. Not only was she my first Follower, but her early comments encouraged me to continue. 

By the way, I find the negative and argumentative comments on the blog just as stimulating in their own way. I have even used some as a springboard for discussing significant issues. (Hello, Monica!) 

(And I’ve even had a comment from someone who could only be Richard Jones himself, the author of the Mental Health Act Manual, the Bible of AMHP’s everywhere. It’s like suddenly discovering that God himself is actually listening to you as you say your prayers at bedtime. And has something to say about it.) 

I have had encouragement from other estimable blogs, including the sadly defunct Mental Nurse, as well as The World in Mentalists and The Not So Big Society. It’s always much appreciated when a post is recommended by others. 

I was very flattered when Guardian Select took an interest in the blog and included it in their directory, and in the last year I have had a number of pieces published in the Guardian’s Social Care Network. 

About a year ago I set up the Masked AMHP’s Facebook group. I had no idea what, if anything would come from it. Over that time, the group has evolved into an open forum for discussion about a wide range of issues relating to mental health. The membership is gratifyingly cosmopolitan and eclectic, ranging from AMHP’s and trainee AMHP’s through to bloggers, academics and importantly, service users. We even have a police officer and a chaplain!

The group has developed into a unique opportunity for people from all sides to come together and discuss how mental health, and the Mental Health Act, impacts on their personal and professional lives. At the last count, there were 325 members. So why not join? (Shameless Plug.) 

So what is next for the Masked AMHP? Should I write a book, and if so, what about? (I’ve been thinking hard about this.) Do readers have any preferences for the types of posts I write, or have suggestions for future posts? Should I start Tweeting? I’d be delighted to hear from you. 

In the meantime, I’ll have to see whether I have the inspiration, or the energy, to write another hundred posts. After all, I’m getting pretty ancient by now.

Thank you all for reading.