11:24 PM: My birthday today was practically perfect. I started book three. I spent time with my lovely daughters watching a bell choir perform. My soul was filled to the brim. I did, however, say that it was practically perfect. Even the spectacularly bad customer service & food at the terrible downtown Burger King could compare to the blow to my evening joy that was Dunkin Donuts being closed at 9pm. When did that happen? I enjoyed going there after ten all the time. The lobby was empty. There was no hustle and bustle from customers. It was a perfect environment for writing. Hey! I bought a donut or two. To think that losing my business four months ago when I moved across town would affect them so badly. I feel just terrible. I’m sure the lack of customers late at night had nothing to do with it.
Being resilient, I recovered and then picked up some Krispy Kreme donuts at a gas station. It wasn’t quite the same ambience that I was looking for, but the donuts weren’t terribly stale, and fun was had by all. I celebrated my fiftieth birthday with a pre-used “7” stuck on my donut while my family sang “Happy birthday” off key. Like I said. Perfect.
And now I shall make my last goal for the birth year. I mentioned before that I would start book three and post the chapters online. I made the deadline of my birthday. What I didn’t mention was that I was going to challenge myself to write it within two weeks. That means that book four, which I will begin in moments, won’t see much traction until I finish book three. But I will begin it today. Only twenty minutes left to my birthday.
The purpose of all this public writing is to hold myself accountable to others and to show people who struggle with depression or ADHD that they can make great goals if they apply themselves. I don’t think I’ve accomplished anything truly great yet, but I feel great. That’s almost as good.

⁂

If you like feeling great, it will feel great to buy my book.
You might also like:
Beating Off Depression with Distractions
ADHD: Living Your Life Backwards
It's Been Decided
Don't Put Your Suicide Message in a Bottle
Linkwithin