Today I had my 400,000th unique visitor to this blog.¹ These days roughly 5000–6000 unique people each month visit my site. It is a far cry from just my ex-mother-in-law dropping by when I started nine years ago. I have met so many wonderful people over the years with so many different stories & struggles. Your support, coupled with the various experiences that have shaped me and helped me mature this past near decade, have made me better—even wiser.
Today was a landmark day for another reason. I emailed my editor the last edits for my book on overcoming suicide. I was supposed to be done writing that book, but as I started formatting my book in anticipation of her edits, I thought of better ways to express certain concepts. She’s about half way through the book now, though she will have to go over some of those chapters again now that I’ve changed them, but then I will put it all together and send out beta-reader copies. Very soon, it will be finished and ready to publish. I’m looking forward to it.
I’m currently writing a book on overcoming depression. It’s based on one of the most popular posts I’ve ever written: Depression: Ten Ways to Fight It Off, Part 1 & 2. I’m thinking of posting the first drafts of each chapter as blog entries, then expanding them in the book to include reader anecdotes, personal anecdotes, footnotes, references, etc. I originally wrote it in 2006, and I have learned much more about managing Depression since then, especially since I am a father of daughters who deal with Depression. Regardless of how I approach the project, this will be my next main focus here on the blog. I’m sure I’ll still write about ADHD. After all, I have quite a few ADHD books I want to write. Since my first book project has taken nearly two years to complete, my other goal should be to get faster. Lastly, there are stories that are fidgeting inside my skull like restless birds anxious to take flight. I have silenced that part of me for too long.
Thank you for reading. I hope you continue to visit my blog and share it with others.
I don’t count page views. One person may stay on the site and read dozens of articles, and another person may jet once they’ve read what they came for. I prefer tallying the unique visitors calculated by their differing IP addresses.  ↩
You might also like:
300,000 Unique Readers!
Writing in a Fishbowl: Day One
Looking for Reader Testimonials
Here's to Ten Years with A Splintered Mind
Linkwithin